“A FUTURE MADE IN SCOTLAND.”  
VOTE SNP FOR SCOTLAND.
 DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND.
VOTE SNP FOR SCOTLAND TO BECOME AN INDEPENDENT COUNTRY.
 “We will put the interests of the people of Scotland first, and protect public services like our cherished NHS.” 
 OUR VISION.
DECISIONS MADE IN SCOTLAND, FOR SCOTLAND.  I believe people are crying out for principled leadership, which is prepared to argue for what it believes in.
In this election, and in this manifesto, that is what the SNP is offering.
Moderate left of centre policies to make life better for the people of Scotland.
SNP MPs who will always put the interests of the people of Scotland first, and protect public services like our cherished NHS.
And, at the core of what we offer, the belief that decisions about Scotland should be made in Scotland through independence.
The Westminster system is broken, and for far too many people, the UK economy has failed.
So at this election the SNP is putting forward a positive, optimistic and hopeful alternative to that broken system and that failed economy.
The Tories have enforced deep spending cuts, they’ve imposed Brexit and have worsened the cost of living crisis. They need to go.
But we have to take care about what replaces them – the answer is not more spending cuts.
It is not more Brexit and it is definitely not more Westminster decision-making about Scotland.
And yet that is what the Labour Party is committed to: cuts, Brexit and continued Westminster control.
I honestly don’t believe that’s something Scotland can bear.
Voting SNP is the best means of ensuring Labour are stopped from carrying out their cuts.
SNP MPs will do all that they can to protect Scotland’s NHS and act to stop further austerity being imposed by Westminster.
But, however hard we work, the Westminster conspiracy of silence between Labour and the Conservatives on the cuts to come and on the damage of Brexit, demonstrates that decisions about Scotland’s future should be taken in Scotland.
In Government at Holyrood with limited powers and in line with our principles, we’re helping with the cost of living through free prescriptions, all day off peak rail fares and free bus travel for young people.
We’ve grown the economy faster, per head, than the UK, we have the best performing core A&E units in the UK, and we’ve built 40% more affordable homes per head than in England, and over 70% more than in Wales.
With independence, all the key decisions over our economy, taxes, and spending will transfer from Westminster to Scotland.
I have no doubt that everyone who lives in our wonderful, diverse country – whether they were born here, or have come from the rest of the UK or further afield – are the best people to make decisions about Scotland’s future.
So on Thursday, 4th July, to remove the Tories from office, to put the interests of Scotland first, and for a future made in Scotland, vote SNP.
John Swinney MSP, Leader, Scottish National Party.
 Deliver independence to strengthen our economy, tackle the cost of living, and bring about a fairer country.
End 14 years of austerity, reversing deep damaging cuts to public services that have put real pressure on the money available for the NHS and schools. We will stand against the Westminster consensus on cuts.
Rejoin the EU, reverse the damage of Brexit and re-enter the single market restoring free movement for EU citizens.
Tackle the cost of living crisis by providing urgent support for household finances and reducing the impact of rising interest rates and inflation.
Protect our NHS from the twin threats of Westminster privatisation and austerity. The UK Government should back our Bill to keep the NHS in public hands and boost NHS England funding by at least £16bn each year, providing an extra £1.6bn to NHS Scotland.
Reverse the £1.3bn Westminster cut to our capital budget, to enable us to invest in new hospitals, schools, rail and road infrastructure and help to achieve net zero.
“We will protect our NHS from the twin threats of Westminster privatisation and austerity.” 
OUR KEY PLEDGES.
Demand an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, release of hostages and ending arms sales to Israel. We call on the UK Government to immediately recognise Palestine as an independent state.
Scrap the two child benefit cap, ending the unnecessary suffering caused by both the benefit cap on children and associated rape clause.
Demand the devolution of new borrowing powers to invest in a just transition and that the new UK Government match our £500m Just Transition Fund for the North East and Moray to help build on the region’s world-renowned expertise, create jobs, foster innovation and deliver a fair and managed transition to net zero.
Legislate for an essentials guarantee ensuring that everyone can afford basic necessities like food and utilities.
Support the abolition of the undemocratic House of Lords.
Stand up for WASPI women by making sure the UK Government delivers full, fast and fair compensation for women who have been wronged by pension inequality.
Devolve powers to create a bespoke migration system for Scotland that values those who decide to work, live, study and invest here and allows us to address our specific demographic and economic needs.
Empower workers by scrapping exploitative zero hours contracts, banning callous ‘fire and rehire’ practices and repealing the Minimum Service Bill.
Scrap the Rwanda scheme and stand firm against the demonisation of migrants.
Tackle the drugs death crisis by taking a radical public health approach; decriminalising drugs for personal use and introducing a framework to allow Supervised Drug Consumption Facilities.
Protect pensions by maintaining the triple lock and move to deliver a wellbeing pension. We will oppose any further increases in the state pension age.
Scrap Trident and invest the money into conventional defence and public services.
Increase maternity pay by bringing the UK into line with other European countries and promoting shared parental leave.
Defend free university tuition in Scotland.
The SNP is the only party that will protect students and defend free education, meaning graduates in Scotland are thousands of pounds better off.
 “In an independent Scotland, decisions about Scotland will be made in Scotland, for Scotland.” 