BUILDING A FAIRER, GREENER ECONOMY.
A green energy powerhouse Scotland is an energy-rich nation but without the full powers of independence we cannot fully harness the opportunities our vast renewable energy sources provide.
We will demand the devolution of powers over energy regulation, pricing and production to ensure that our natural energy resources are used to best serve the needs of the Scottish people.
Scotland has won the energy lottery not once but twice – but instead of benefiting Scotland’s interests, our energy resources have bankrolled successive UK Governments. Scotland as a whole should see far more of that benefit, but we also believe the local communities who house the infrastructure – like pylons and wind farms – should get a much greater degree of benefit.
Devolution allows us very few mechanisms via the planning system to deliver increases in community benefit. Therefore, it is vital the UK Government devolves the powers to us, so that wherever there is a significant investment, we can ensure our communities feel the benefit.
With full powers, we could make changes to the electricity grid system that currently holds back the development of renewable energy in Scotland, including reducing fees for Scottish producers to connect.
Until we have those powers, it is crucial that the UK Government steps up.
The UK Government must invest at least £28bn a year in the green economy to deliver a step change in public and private investment in net zero and major investment in the domestic supply chain. As part of this investment, the UK Government should seek an equity stake in future energy projects. The return on this investment for the taxpayer will be used to directly benefit the Scottish people by protecting jobs, growing the green economy and lowering energy bills.
 BUILDING A FAIRER, GREENER ECONOMY.
Under the SNP, Scotland’s economy is already one of the best performing parts of the UK with both GDP per head and productivity growing faster in Scotland than the UK as a whole.
But we want to go further.
Our commitment to tackling the twin crises of climate change and nature loss is unwavering and we believe emissions reduction and economic prosperity go hand in hand. We want to share in the enormous economic opportunities of the global transition to net zero.
SNP MPs will demand the UK Government: Bring forward an immediate emergency budget following the election to reverse cuts to public spending and deliver meaningful investment in economic growth, including green energy.
Work at pace with the Acorn Project and Scottish Cluster to secure the fastest possible deployment following the UK Government’s failure to support the Acorn carbon capture, utilisation and storage project at track 1. Urgent clarity is required to restore investor confidence, boost economic opportunities and make progress against our net zero obligations.
Modernise the Contracts for Difference scheme to enable the stable deployment of Scotland’s renewable energy pipeline.
Take an evidence-based approach to oil and gas. The UK Government is the decision-maker on new oil and gas licences. We believe any further extraction must be consistent with our climate obligations and take due account of energy security considerations. Decisions must be made on a rigorously evidence-led, case-by-case basis, through a robust climate compatibility assessment.
Support the North East and the Just Transition.
North Sea oil and gas is naturally declining, and as the transition to new industries gathers pace, we are clear that the workers, families and people of that industry and the North East must not be abandoned. We are supporting them with the £500 million North-East Transition Fund - a fund the UK Government must now at least match.
Deliver a sustainable future for Grangemouth.
The future of the Grangemouth complex must be secured and a just transition delivered for the workforce. The UK Government must recognise the importance of the whole site to Scotland’s economy and communities and must invest in a sustainable future. Time is needed to unlock the significant opportunities for green industries of the future and it is important that the skilled workforce is retained, by extending refining for as long as possible, while that happens. Only in this way, can as many jobs as possible be protected and the transition made to working on the new, greener technologies that offer a long-term future for the site..
Rule out new nuclear power plants in Scotland. The SNP believe the best pathway to net zero and secure, affordable and clean energy is through significant growth in renewables, storage, hydrogen and carbon capture.
Promote Scotland’s hydrogen export potential.
Scotland is well placed to supply significant amounts of hydrogen to continental Europe.
SNP MPs will press for the UK Government to secure progress with direct interconnection between Scotland and the continent, and regulatory agreement to unlock Scotland’s renewable potential.
 Ban new coal licences. Follow the SNP Scottish Government’s lead and commit to no support for new coal mines, which would undermine our action to reach net zero.
Provide fair funding for climate. Scotland has over two thirds of the UK’s peatland, and currently plants over 60% of trees in the UK, yet funds restoration and planting within our budget, with no help from the UK Government.
Westminster must ensure fair funding flows to devolved nations to enable our, and their, climate ambition given that for the whole of the UK to reach net zero by 2050, Scotland must do so by 2045.
Establish a Four Nations Climate Response Group to agree climate plans across the UK that deliver on our net-zero targets and ensure the UK Government stops backtracking on climate ambition.
Devolve powers to create a bespoke migration system for Scotland that values those who decide to work, live, study and invest here and allows us to address our specific demographic and economic needs.
Introduce a rural visa pilot scheme. Scotland should have full powers over immigration, including the devolution of overseas workers’ employment visas. Until then, it is vital the UK Government acknowledges the distinct demographic challenges we face in Scotland and introduce a pilot to mitigate against labour shortages as a result of a hard Brexit and hostile immigration policies.
Mitigate the harm of Brexit on productivity by reviewing immigration rules and expanding shortage occupation lists, so businesses have access to the workforce they need.
Provide sustainable funding for farming.
Despite numerous requests, Scotland has had no commitment from Westminster on any future funding for farming after 2025. The UK Government must increase funding for farming – to at least pre-Brexit levels - and provide certainty through multi-annual funding frameworks.
Agree a veterinary agreement with the EU to ease exports and imports.
Give Scotland our rightful share of marine funding. Scotland has 63% of UK fishing waters and over 90% of aquaculture production but, since Brexit, Westminster has shortchanged funding for innovation and investment – allocating only £14m directly, instead of the £62m we were entitled to. The UK Government must give Scotland our rightful share of marine funding – and provide certainty through multi- annual funding frameworks.
Prioritise Scotland’s unique fishing needs.
The Tories’ post-Brexit trade agreement with the EU has created a £281 million shortfall in quota value and threatens a key export market for Scottish salmon after 2026. Only with independence will we get the change Scotland’s seafood sector really needs. Until then, to protect our interests, we will press for real and meaningful engagement for Scotland through the upcoming review of the trade agreement and continue to call for our fair share of quota through a shift to zonal attachment.
Prioritise research and investment in Artificial Intelligence to capitalise on the technological revolution and ensure its full potential is maximised in supporting our public services in a way that is open, ethical and transparent.
 A CLEANER, GREENER TRANSPORT SYSTEM.
Under the SNP huge improvements have been made to our transport system. We’ve scrapped bridge tolls, invested over £11bn on rail infrastructure, brought Scotland’s railway into public hands and removed peak fares, provided free bus travel to 2.2 million people and completed the Queensferry crossing on time and under budget. But our ambition is constrained by resources and powers controlled by Westminster.
SNP MPs will call for the UK Government to: Transfer full powers for complete integration of track and train to Scotland – a fully devolved railway, including full ownership and powers over Network Rail Scotland and with powers for permanent public ownership of rail services to best serve Scotland’s passengers, communities and economy.
Promote a fair and affordable transition to zero-emission transport fuels and ban the import and sale of new, non zero-emission buses by 2025. The UK Government must also fully support the production and use of sustainable bridging fuels in the maritime and aviation sectors.
Strengthen incentives to purchase cleaner vehicles. Following the example of France, the UK Government should establish a new Low Income EV Car Leasing Fund, backed up by at least £500m, to enable 50,000 EV leases a year to benefit low income families.
Invest in safer roads. Reducing road traffic is key to cutting emissions, but in a rural and sparsely populated country, not everywhere and everyone can be expected to make the same changes at the same time. It is vital that we ensure roads are as safe, reliable and resilient as possible. We are committed to dualling the A9 in full between Perth and Inverness and improving the A96, including dualling Inverness to Nairn and the Nairn Bypass. We will press the UK Government to fulfil their commitment to fund improvements to the A75.
