BUILDING A FAIRER, GREENER ECONOMY.
A green energy powerhouse Scotland is an energy-rich nation but without the full powers of independence we cannot fully harness the opportunities our vast renewable energy sources provide.
We will demand the devolution of powers over energy regulation, pricing and production to ensure that our natural energy resources are used to best serve the needs of the Scottish people.
Scotland has won the energy lottery not once but twice – but instead of benefiting Scotland’s interests, our energy resources have bankrolled successive UK Governments. Scotland as a whole should see far more of that benefit, but we also believe the local communities who house the infrastructure – like pylons and wind farms – should get a much greater degree of benefit.
Devolution allows us very few mechanisms via the planning system to deliver increases in community benefit. Therefore, it is vital the UK Government devolves the powers to us, so that wherever there is a significant investment, we can ensure our communities feel the benefit.
With full powers, we could make changes to the electricity grid system that currently holds back the development of renewable energy in Scotland, including reducing fees for Scottish producers to connect.
Until we have those powers, it is crucial that the UK Government steps up.
The UK Government must invest at least £28bn a year in the green economy to deliver a step change in public and private investment in net zero and major investment in the domestic supply chain. As part of this investment, the UK Government should seek an equity stake in future energy projects. The return on this investment for the taxpayer will be used to directly benefit the Scottish people by protecting jobs, growing the green economy and lowering energy bills.

A FAIRER TAX SYSTEM.
Against a backdrop of biting austerity, we’ve delivered the fairest and most progressive income tax system in the UK - raising an additional £1.5bn to invest in our public services, fund fair pay deals for nurses and other public sector workers and support our economy. However, without the full powers of independence, we only have a very limited range of tax powers to work with.
SNP MPs will demand the full devolution of tax powers to enable us to create a fairer system that protects public services and invests in our economy. With the devolution of National Insurance, we could ensure rates and thresholds fit our progressive income tax rates.
With devolution of windfall taxation for companies operating in Scotland, we would be able to tackle the twin crises of cost of living and climate change while meeting the specific needs of Scotland. We believe it is only right that companies making excess profits shoulder the burden that families face, but that this must be a wider tax - balanced across companies - rather than the raid on the North-East of Scotland proposed by Labour and the Tories.
With the full devolution of tax powers, we would crack down on tax avoidance and evasion and improve the transparency of tax paid by international companies to ensure that they make a proportionate contribution to tax revenues.
 Devolving road tax and fuel duty would allow us to develop a new approach to funding road travel that meets Scotland’s needs.
We believe it is wrong that suncream is subject to VAT, but caviar is not. We support the reform of VAT to address the current imbalances and to ensure that life saving products, like defibrillators, are as accessible and affordable as possible.
We have already removed charitable rates relief from private schools in Scotland, and with full powers over VAT we would go further and end the exemption for private schools.
To drive economic growth and help in our transition to net zero we would introduce a lower rate of VAT for hospitality and tourism sectors, address the imbalance in VAT rates in the construction sector to encourage the refurbishment and retrofitting of existing buildings and remove VAT from on-street electric vehicle charging.
UNLOCKING INVESTMENT.
Decades of Westminster cuts have left infrastructure across the UK creaking. It is clear there is a need for more investment – not only to support the delivery of public services but also to grow the economy.
The Tories in Westminster have set their fiscal rules to choke off borrowing for investment and cap welfare spending, creating a barrier to a pragmatic approach to deliver vital infrastructure projects. We have a much more ambitious vision for Scotland.
We have already invested in key infrastructure projects like the Borders Railway and the Queensferry crossing and delivered over 128,000 affordable homes, but without a change in approach to fiscal rules we are reaching the limits of what can be done.
The SNP is calling on the UK Government to scrap their fiscal rules and introduce new ones to allow greater investment in renewing infrastructure and services. The UK Government must abandon the current trajectory and recognise the value of investing in national infrastructure.
Fiscal Rules We’re proposing a sensible alternative, setting out three new fiscal rules to enable increased capital investment while instilling a new prudent approach to government finances: ● Public Sector Net Worth rule – recognising the value of investing in infrastructure and public sector assets, rather than just liabilities ● Upper limit on debt servicing costs – to allow explicit consideration of the sustainability of the stock of debt ● Three–year detailed spending plans – to support detailed planning and improve clarity for devolved administrations.
