PROTECTING SCOTLAND’S NHS.
Our NHS is our most cherished public service.
Under the SNP, funding for Scotland’s NHS has more than doubled and NHS staffing is at a record high – with far more doctors and nurses per head in Scotland than south of the border.
When it comes to investment and improvement in our NHS, we’re determined to go further – including investing £300m to drive down waiting times – but we are doing that with one hand tied behind our back by Westminster.
SNP MPs will demand that the UK Government: Protect the NHS from Westminster privatisation through our ‘Keep the NHS in Public Hands’ Bill. Further privatisation must be ruled out and the new UK Government should commit to back our Bill, ensuring the health service is fully protected as a publicly owned and operated service. The Bill will stop any UK government undermining the principles and protections of the NHS as part of any future trade deals.
Boost NHS spending by a minimum of £10bn extra each year to address rampant inflationary pressures and improve performance. This investment into NHS England would generate an additional £1bn annually for NHS Scotland to help meet increasing demand.
Match Scotland’s NHS pay deals by increasing investment in NHS England staff pay and conditions of at least £6bn. This would deliver around £600m for Scotland that we could invest in pay deals for our hardworking NHS staff. Combined with our calls for additional investment to improve performance, this £16bn funding boost would generate £1.6bn annually for Scotland’s NHS.
Standing up for our workforce. SNP MPs will call for the reversal of recent moves by the Tories to stop care workers from overseas bringing their families with them to work in the UK. Without these vital workers coming to care for our loved ones, we will see shortages increase further and the most vulnerable in our society suffer.
CREATING A JUST AND HEALTHIER SCOTLAND.
While Westminster governments prioritise tax cuts for the wealthy, the SNP Scottish Government is focussed on mitigating the cruel policies inflicted on the poorest in our society – investing around £3bn a year in helping tackle poverty and the impacts of the Westminster made cost of living crisis.
Within our devolved powers, we are delivering 14 benefits – 7 of them brand new and only available in Scotland. Our game changing Scottish Child Payment now sits at £26.70 per child a week and is lifting thousands of children out of poverty. The UK Government should take complimentary action to help the Scottish Government fulfil its mission to eradicate child poverty.
While we do all we can to lift people out of poverty, it is clear that Westminster control holds us back. With the powers of independence, Scotland could unleash its full potential and build a better, fairer society. We will continue to call for the full devolution of social security powers so that we can put those foundations in place. Until then, SNP MPs will call for the UK Government to: STANDING UP FOR WORKERS Years of attacks on workers’ rights have shown that Westminster is not working for workers. With independence we can guarantee the rights of working people in Scotland are protected and strengthened. Until then, it is vital Scotland has strong SNP voices at Westminster to stand up for workers. SNP MPs will demand that the UK Government: Devolve employment rights and the minimum wage so that we can scrap exploitative zero hours contracts, ban ‘fire and rehire’ practices and take action to close the gender pay gap. We would increase the minimum wage to at least the level of the national living wage and increase in line with inflation, and end age discrimination of pay levels.
Amend the definition of worker to strengthen protections for those with unfair contracts by creating a single status of “worker” for all but the genuinely self-employed.
Scrap the sick pay threshold to ensure lower paid workers have access to statutory sick pay and scrap the four day waiting period to allow those who need financial support through illness to access it sooner.
Increase paid maternity leave to one year, with maternity pay set at 100% of average weekly earnings for the first 12 weeks, then 90% for 40 weeks or £185.00, whichever is lower. The UK Government should increase shared parental leave from 52 to 64 weeks, with the additional 12 weeks to be the minimum taken by the father on a ‘use it or lose it’ basis, in order to encourage an increase in shared parental leave.
Protect the right to strike. SNP MPs will demand the next UK Government stand with workers and repeal the Strikes (Minimum Services Levels) Act. Instead, they should learn from the recent success of the Scottish Government and resolve industrial disputes through constructive negotiations. SNP MPs have long called for the repeal of the Trade Union Act 2016, and we will continue to press the UK Government to do so without delay.
Scrap the two child benefit cap and associated rape clause which has driven thousands of families into poverty and forced women to relive the trauma of rape in order to claim the support they, and their children, need to live. Unlike Labour and the Tories, we stand firmly against this abhorrent policy and will continue to call for its abolition.
End the young parent penalty in Universal Credit which sees under-25s receiving considerably less.
Scrap proposed punitive welfare reforms for sick and disabled people which will take support away from some of the most vulnerable people in our communities, and halt DWP repayment demands on Carer’s Allowance.
Protect pensions by maintaining the triple lock and move to deliver a wellbeing pension. We will oppose any acceleration of planned changes or further increases in the state pension age.
Stand up for WASPI women by pressing the UK Government to deliver full, fast and fair compensation for women who have been wronged by pension inequality.
Reverse the cut to Pension Credit that means older couples in Scotland could be £7,000 worse off per year.
Maximise Pension Credit uptake by following Scotland’s lead and introducing a comprehensive benefit take-up strategy for all benefits.
Provide full restitution for the victims of the Equitable Life scandal. It is time for the UK Government to end the delay and provide urgent funding to compensate in full those who saved diligently for retirement in good faith yet suffered serious losses through no fault of their own.
Scrap the cruel bedroom tax which punishes people claiming Universal Credit or housing benefit if they have a spare room in their rented council or housing association home.
Devolve Housing Benefit and Local Housing Allowance which will allow the Scottish Government to take an innovative approach to tackle child poverty, expand the delivery of social housing and to help fund and encourage investment in house building.
Tackle the housing emergency caused by decades of Westminster underinvestment, a hard Brexit and a £1.3bn cut to the Scottish Government’s capital budget from the UK Government. The UK Government must restore the cut to our Capital Budget.
Protect the right to abortion. We are clear that all women should have access to abortion services in a timely and safe manner. The UK Government should follow Scotland’s lead in reviewing the law on abortion to ensure that abortion is first and foremost treated as a healthcare matter.
Provide justice for Infected Blood victims. We believe that compensation for victims of infected blood is long overdue and will work with the UK Government to ensure any compensation scheme works effectively for everyone who is infected or affected and is delivered without delay.
Take a public health approach to tackle the drug deaths crisis, devolving powers to the Scottish Parliament so we can go further to reduce harm and improve lives in Scotland. We would decriminalise drugs for personal use and introduce a framework to allow Supervised Drug Consumption Facilities.
 Reintroduce UK-wide legislation to create a smoke free generation and recommit to following the SNP Scottish Government’s lead by banning single-use vapes.
Treat problem gambling as a public health matter and take action to tackle the impacts of advertising. We believe a Gambling Levy is long overdue and the UK Government must act urgently to bring forward a levy without further delay.
Introduce a RAAC Remediation Fund to ensure new capital money is made available to allow us to take any action that may be required to tackle the problem of ageing Reinforced Autoclaved Aerated Concrete in our public sector.
Deliver justice for Post Office Horizon victims. It is vital that the UK Government pay compensation at pace to all sub postmasters who have suffered horrendous miscarriages of justice due to the failings of the Post Office Horizon IT system. The vast majority of payments should be made by the end of 2024.
Refund the £175m in VAT owed to Scotland’s emergency services so we can invest it in our vital emergency services.
Introduce ‘Martyn’s Law’ without delay to ensure venues and councils have preventative plans in place against terror attacks.
Protect people, particularly children, by ensuring the Online Safety Act comes into force on time. SNP MPs will press the UK Government to ensure tech firms cannot escape their responsibilities for the content on their platforms through full enforcement of the Act and prompt strengthening of these laws when required.
Introduce a right to consular assistance for British nationals including those who are stranded, imprisoned or who die overseas and to implement in full the recommendations of the 2019 All Party Parliamentary Group report on deaths abroad.
PRIORITISING PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE.
Scotland’s capital budget, which pays for our hospitals, roads and schools, has been hammered by successive Westminster Governments refusing to prioritise investment.
Westminster’s cuts to capital funding have disrupted longer term investment and, as a result, restricted the growth of the Scottish economy.
In the UK Spring Budget, the Tories cut capital yet again, this time by almost 9% – or a cumulative loss of £1.3bn by 2027/28. This cut, coupled with sky high inflation, places unprecedented pressure on our infrastructure budget.
It is vital that the UK Government at least reverse the £1.3bn cut to our capital budget, to enable us to invest in the new hospitals, schools, rail and road infrastructure we would like to see, and help to achieve net zero and secure the sustainable jobs we need for the future.
“We will call on the UK Government to scrap their fiscal rules to allow greater investment in infrastructure and public services.”  Brexit has been a disaster for Scotland. Despite voting overwhelmingly to remain within the EU, we have been dragged out against our will and are powerless to escape the consequences.
Brexit has wiped billions of pounds from the Scottish economy, pushed up prices on food and services and hit hard our ability to fund vital public services such as the NHS.