A CLEANER, GREENER TRANSPORT SYSTEM.
Under the SNP huge improvements have been made to our transport system. We’ve scrapped bridge tolls, invested over £11bn on rail infrastructure, brought Scotland’s railway into public hands and removed peak fares, provided free bus travel to 2.2 million people and completed the Queensferry crossing on time and under budget. But our ambition is constrained by resources and powers controlled by Westminster.
SNP MPs will call for the UK Government to: Transfer full powers for complete integration of track and train to Scotland – a fully devolved railway, including full ownership and powers over Network Rail Scotland and with powers for permanent public ownership of rail services to best serve Scotland’s passengers, communities and economy.
Promote a fair and affordable transition to zero-emission transport fuels and ban the import and sale of new, non zero-emission buses by 2025. The UK Government must also fully support the production and use of sustainable bridging fuels in the maritime and aviation sectors.
Strengthen incentives to purchase cleaner vehicles. Following the example of France, the UK Government should establish a new Low Income EV Car Leasing Fund, backed up by at least £500m, to enable 50,000 EV leases a year to benefit low income families.
Invest in safer roads. Reducing road traffic is key to cutting emissions, but in a rural and sparsely populated country, not everywhere and everyone can be expected to make the same changes at the same time. It is vital that we ensure roads are as safe, reliable and resilient as possible. We are committed to dualling the A9 in full between Perth and Inverness and improving the A96, including dualling Inverness to Nairn and the Nairn Bypass. We will press the UK Government to fulfil their commitment to fund improvements to the A75.
Provided free bus travel for over 60s and under 22s – over 2.2 million people 
Removed peak fares from our railways, saving commuters as much as £26.20 per return journey.
PRIORITISING PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE.
Scotland’s capital budget, which pays for our hospitals, roads and schools, has been hammered by successive Westminster Governments refusing to prioritise investment.
Westminster’s cuts to capital funding have disrupted longer term investment and, as a result, restricted the growth of the Scottish economy.
In the UK Spring Budget, the Tories cut capital yet again, this time by almost 9% – or a cumulative loss of £1.3bn by 2027/28. This cut, coupled with sky high inflation, places unprecedented pressure on our infrastructure budget.
It is vital that the UK Government at least reverse the £1.3bn cut to our capital budget, to enable us to invest in the new hospitals, schools, rail and road infrastructure we would like to see, and help to achieve net zero and secure the sustainable jobs we need for the future.
“We will call on the UK Government to scrap their fiscal rules to allow greater investment in infrastructure and public services.”  Brexit has been a disaster for Scotland. Despite voting overwhelmingly to remain within the EU, we have been dragged out against our will and are powerless to escape the consequences.
Brexit has wiped billions of pounds from the Scottish economy, pushed up prices on food and services and hit hard our ability to fund vital public services such as the NHS.