Strong Leadership
Positive Change.

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH.

Every day, Sinn Féin representatives are providing strong leadership and delivering positive change for communities across Ireland.
Nobody works harder for the communities and people we represent.
Sinn Féin is on the side of workers and families, working nationally and delivering locally.
We are leading the way to build a stronger, better and fairer country.
Tá muid ag obair le hÉireann a aontú.
The election on July 4th is a real opportunity to step forward towards a better future.
For a society that defends you when you are at your weakest, that encourages you when you are at your strongest.
Sinn Féin is committed to delivering on the things that matter most to workers and families: healthcare, the cost of living, housing, education, childcare.
We are focused on what is possible to achieve if we work together, making politics work, and demonstrating that positive change is possible.
On day one after the Westminster election, Sinn Féin MPs will be working hard as part of a strong all-Ireland Sinn Féin team to deliver for all our people and communities.
So I am asking you to send a clear message in this election about what you want for the future.
To vote for strong leadership and positive change.
To vote for a party that is committed to working for all.
On July 4th Vótáil Sinn Féin X.
Mary Lou McDonald TD SINN FÉIN PRESIDENT.
A message from Uachtarán Shinn Féin Mary Lou McDonald TD.

INTRODUCTION.
Leas-Uachtarán
Shinn Féin First Minister Michelle O’Neill MLA
In this election people can send a clear message about what they want for the future.
By voting for Sinn Féin people are endorsing strong leadership, positive change, and a commitment to work for all.
You have an opportunity to vote for decisions about your life and your future to be made here, at home.
You are supporting better funding for our public services and rejecting years of Tory cuts which have impacted the people of the North.
And you are supporting a stronger economy, creating more well-paid jobs, and making childcare more accessible and affordable.
No matter what background or community people come from, Sinn Féin MPs will work hard and deliver on the things that matter to workers, families and businesses – the cost of living, health, education, good jobs and investing in local and rural communities.
Change will only be delivered in the North by all of us working together in the Executive and Assembly, but this election gives people a chance to send a clear message about the future they want.
Let’s seize the opportunity to return the strongest Sinn Féin team and keep moving forward to a new and better future.
On July 4th vótáil Sinn Féin X.
Michelle O’Neill MLA SINN FÉIN VICE PRESIDENT FIRST MINISTER.