Reform UK will restore Law and Order on Britain’s streets and make sure that criminals face justice.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE FIRST 100 DAYS: Commence Increase in Police Numbers Recruitment to increase UK per capita police numbers to 300 per 100k population. That is 40,000 new front-line officers, over a 5-year parliament.
Commence Zero Tolerance Policing Clampdown on all crime and antisocial behaviour.
Increase Stop and Search substantially.
Prison for violent crimes and possessing a knife.
Drug dealing and trafficking will get mandatory life imprisonment. A new offence of Substantial Possession of Drugs will meet heavy fines.
New Police Leadership and Recruitment Regime.
Strong preference for ex-military officers and personnel. High standards of fitness and presentation for front line officers. Sack Chief Constables that allow two-tier policing.
More Bobbies on the Beat Ensure that police return to the beat and use better technology and stop wasting time on paperwork.
Allow PCSOs to become police officers before the role is phased out.
Common Sense Policing not ‘Woke’ Policing Scrap all Diversity, Equality and Inclusion (DE&I) roles and regulations to stop two-tier policing.
Overhaul the Independent Office of Police Conduct (IOPC) so that the police complaints system becomes more accountable and works for the law- abiding public.
Thereafter: De-Politicise the College of Policing Prioritise crime prevention, discipline, public service and high standards of strength and fitness among trainees. Replace degree-standard entry with an entrance exam. Require officers to complete a 2-year probationary period. Stricter entry requirements.
POLICING.
Law and Order Urgently Needs Reform.
 “Zero tolerance policing. More police, higher standards” POLICING PLEDGES COSTS = £3 BILLION PA.
Reform UK will build a common sense justice system that punishes criminals and keeps the public safe.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE FIRST 100 DAYS: Urgent Sentencing Review with Automatic Life Imprisonment for Violent Repeat Offenders.
Those committing second violent or serious offences will receive mandatory life sentences.
Increase the Criminal Justice Budget The budget is almost the same as it was 10 years ago. Increase it from £10 billion to £12 billion to ensure more high calibre staff to cut delays. Reopen local magistrates’ courts to clear the case backlog.
Change the Definition of Hate Crime The CPS and police definition of a hate crime has led to systemic bias. Members of the British public must not be investigated because ‘any’ person ‘perceives’ that a hate crime has been committed.
Start Building of 10,000 New Detention Places Start expansion in capacity of state built and managed prisons so that life means life for those who endanger the public. Commission disused military bases if needed.
Thereafter: Reform the Child Maintenance Service.
We will launch a special division of the Family Court for maintenance and defaults. Share parental care 50/50 where appropriate. Rights of access for grandparents.
Stop Child Grooming Gangs Deport offenders holding dual citizenship. Make child grooming an aggravating offence. Improve safeguarding of victims and vulnerable. No bail for grooming gang offenders.
Tackle Youth Crime Reopen High Intensity Training Camps for young offenders to teach basic education, teamwork and values.
JUSTICE.
Our Justice System Needs Reform.
 “Reform UK will make sure that criminals face justice.” JUSTICE PLEDGES COSTS = £2 BILLION PA.