ECONOMY - BUSINESS.
Our Economy Needs Reform “Reform UK will back risk takers and wealth creators.” ECONOMY - BUSINESS PLEDGES.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE FIRST 100 DAYS: Bank of England Must Stop Paying Interest to Commercial Banks on QE Reserves This approach would save around £35 billion per year and has been endorsed by senior figures at the Financial Times, New Economics Foundation, and IFS, as well as two former Deputy Governors of the Bank of England.
Save £5 in every £100 Every department must slash wasteful spending, cut bureaucracy, improve efficiency and negotiate better value procurement without touching frontline services. This will save £50 billion per year, ensure tax cuts and boost our economy.
Brexit Bonus. Cut Unnecessary Regulations Britain still retains over 6,700 EU laws. Government red tape and nanny state regulations are estimated to have cost the UK economy £143 billion since 2015.
That means £ billions lost in growth and taxes.
Cut Foreign Aid by 50% Save £6 billion from the £12.8 billion budget. A major review is needed into the effectiveness of overseas aid. That includes global quangos to which we pay over £7 billion every year.
Collect £ Billions in Unpaid Tax HM Revenue and Customs failed to collect tens of billions in taxes last year due to understaffing and bad management. Improved HMRC competence would deliver lower taxes to British workers.
SLASH GOVERNMENT WASTE: POTENTIAL SAVINGS = £91 BILLION PA SLASH GOVERNMENT WASTE Government Spending Needs Major Reform.
 “Reform UK will make sure taxpayers’ money is never wasted.”  Reform UK will make work pay and help the unemployed to escape the benefits trap.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE FIRST 100 DAYS: Make Work Pay. Lift the Income Tax Start Point to £20,000 Per Year This frees up to 7 million people from paying Income Tax and saves every worker almost £1,500 per year. Basic Tax rate stays at 20%. The higher rate should begin at £70,000.
Cut Energy Taxes, Beat the Cost-of-Living Crisis Save households over £500 per year. Lower fuel duty by 20p per litre for both residential and business users. Scrap VAT on energy bills. Scrap environmental levies.
Cut Residential Stamp Duty Substantially boost economic activity and housebuilding by cutting Stamp Duty to 0% below £750k. Cut it to 2% from £750k - £1.5m and cut it to 4% over £1.5m.
Abolish the VAT Tourist Tax The government has cost our economy over £10 billion when they stopped the VAT refund scheme for tourist shopping. This also deterred up to 2 million tourists.
Abolish Inheritance Tax (IHT) for all Estates Under £2m That means some 98% of all estates. The rate above £2m will be 20% tax, with the option to donate to charity instead.
ECONOMY - PERSONAL Our Economy Needs Reform.
 “Reform UK will take 7 million people out of Income Tax.” ECONOMY - PERSONAL PLEDGES COSTS = £70 BILLION PA.
 Reform UK will back risk takers and wealth creators and make sure that Britain is open for business.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE FIRST 100 DAYS: Free Over 1.2 Million Small and Medium Sized Businesses from Corporation Tax Lift the minimum profit threshold to £100k. Reduce the main Corporation Tax Rate from 25% to 20%, then to 15% from Year 3.
Abolish IR35 Rules to Support Sole Traders Britain’s self-employed often work longer hours and take more risks. Many have no pension and receive no sick pay.
Lift the VAT Threshold to £150,000 Free up small entrepreneurs from red tape.
Thereafter: Support Small and Medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs) Abolish Business Rates for high street based SMEs.
Offset this with Online Delivery Tax at 4% for large, multinational enterprises to create a fairer playing field for high streets. Cut entrepreneurs’ tax to 5%.
Reform the Planning System Fast-track new housing on brownfield sites and infrastructure projects to boost businesses, especially in coastal regeneration areas, Wales, the North, and the Midlands.
Slash Red Tape to Boost Industry and Exports Scrap thousands of laws that hold back British business and damage productivity, including employment laws. We must make it easier to hire and fire so that businesses can grow.
Reform the Tax System Major simplification is needed. At over 21,000 pages, the UK’s tax code is a burden. Hong Kong’s tax code is under 500 pages.
