Reform UK wants an education system that ensures young people are proud of Britain and learn the skills, character and values to succeed in life.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE FIRST 100 DAYS: A Patriotic Curriculum in Primary and Secondary Schools.
Any teaching about a period or example of British or European imperialism or slavery must be paired with the teaching of a non-European occurrence of the same to ensure balance. History and social science curriculum to be reviewed and audited regularly to ensure balance. Our children must be taught about their heritage.
Ban Transgender Ideology in Primary and Secondary Schools.
No gender questioning, social transitioning or pronoun swapping. Inform parents of under 16s about their children’s life decisions. Schools must have single sex facilities.
Tax relief of 20% on all Independent Education No VAT on Fees. If parents can afford to pay a bit more, we should incentivise them to choose independent schools. This will significantly ease pressure on state schools and improve education for all.
Scrap Interest on Student Loans.
Extend loan capital repayment periods to 45 years.
Restrict undergraduate numbers well below current levels, too many courses are not good enough and students are being ripped off. Enforce minimum entry standards.
Thereafter: Cut Funding to Universities that Undermine.
Free Speech.
The government’s Free Speech Act is toothless.
Allowing political bias or cancel culture must face heavy financial penalties.
Permanent Exclusions for Violent and Disruptive Students We will double the number of Pupil Referral Units (PRUs) so schools can function safely. We will also ensure that best practice is spread across PRUs.
Universities Must Provide 2-Year Undergraduate Courses The option of 2-year courses would reduce student debt and allow earlier entry into employment to help pay it off.
Too Many Children and Young People are Being Badly Let Down.
“Education that nurtures skills, character and values - not a divided society.” EDUCATION PLEDGES COSTS = £5 BILLION PA.