Our Contract with You.
Britain Needs Reform and Reform UK Needs You.
Britain has so much potential.
Our country is full of talent and energy.
Brexit is the opportunity of a lifetime.
The challenges we face are vast. Both Labour and Tory governments have broken promise after promise. They have destroyed trust in our democracy and betrayed the British people.
Our country is worse off, both financially and culturally. The economy is being wrecked by record high taxes, record high national debt, wasteful government spending and nanny state regulations.
Record mass immigration has damaged our country. The small boats crisis threatens our security. Multiculturalism has imported separate communities that reject our way of life. Divisive, ‘woke’ ideology has captured our public institutions. Transgender indoctrination is causing irreversible harm to children.
The unprecedented population explosion has pushed Britain to breaking point. There’s a housing crisis. A benefits crisis. Record crime.
Record NHS waiting lists. Wages are stagnating.
Net Zero has sent energy costs soaring. It is making us poorer and colder, damaging British industry and forcing drivers off the road.
The Tories have broken Britain. Labour will bankrupt Britain. A vote for either is a vote for more incompetence, dishonesty and defeat.
The two-party system has failed. We are ruled by an out-of-touch political class who have turned their backs on our country.
But there is an alternative. The British people now have a common sense choice in Reform UK.
Our Contract with You is a serious plan to reshape the way our country is run. The government must work for the British people.
Not against them.
Only Reform UK will stand up for British culture, identity and values. We will freeze immigration and stop the boats. Restore law and order.
Repair our broken public services. Cut taxes to make work pay. End government waste and deliver our fully funded plan for zero NHS waiting lists. We will unlock Britain’s vast energy treasure of oil and gas to slash energy bills, beat the cost-of-living crisis and unleash real economic growth.
Once and for all, we will take back control over our borders, our money and our laws.
Only Reform UK will secure Britain’s future as a free, proud and independent sovereign nation.
Nigel Farage Leader, Reform UK.
 Our Contract with You is not just another party manifesto. It sets out the reforms that Britain needs in the first 100 days following a general election and thereafter. It has been produced with advice from a range of independent economists, think tanks and advisors on costs and savings.
Costings can be found at the end of each policy page. Some policy areas come with net costs and others with net savings. We have also included extra growth assumptions from our economic reforms. Final annualised budget calculations across a 5 year term of government can be found at the end of this Contract.
We are impatient for change. We are doers and achievers. Our Contract with You will be delivered by people with a real track record of success.
 OUR CORE PLEDGES TO YOU.
Fourteen years of Tory failure are coming to an end. A Labour government would ramp up mass immigration, crime, and taxes even further. Labour and the Tories are two sides of the same coin.
Only Reform UK is ready to stand up for common sense politics. We set out our plan in this document, Our Contract with You. Wherever you look, Britain needs Reform.
Our Contract with You covers the most important areas of policy for you and your family, but we have summarised these into five core pledges: 1. Imagine Smart Immigration, Not Mass Immigration All non-essential immigration frozen to boost wages, protect public services, end the housing crisis and cut crime.
2. Imagine No More Small Boats in the Channel Illegal migrants who come to the UK will be detained and deported. And if needed, migrants in small boats will be picked up and taken back to France.
3. Imagine No NHS Waiting Lists Still free at the point of delivery, healthcare needs reform to improve outcomes and enjoy zero NHS waiting lists. Cut back office waste to spend more money on the frontline. Tax breaks for doctors and nurses to tackle the staffing crisis.
4. Imagine Good Wages for a Hard Day’s Work Lift the income tax starting threshold to £20k to save the lowest paid £1,500 per year. This takes 7 million of the least well-off out of Income Tax to make work pay and get people off benefits.
5. Imagine Affordable, Stable Energy Bills Scrap energy levies and Net Zero to slash energy bills and save each household £500 per year. Unlock Britain’s vast oil and gas reserves to beat the cost of living crisis and unleash real economic growth.
This is whatThis is what Reform UK MPs willReform UK MPs will fight hard for if elected.fight hard for if elected.
So if you want change, vote for it on July 4th.
Vote Reform UK to get reform.
 Reform UK will secure Britain’s borders to protect wages, our public services, and British culture and values.