COSTS = £18 BILLION PA Despite record extra funding in recent years, NHS healthcare outcomes have declined. While still free at the point of delivery, our healthcare needs major reforms to improve results and enjoy zero waiting lists.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE FIRST 100 DAYS: End Doctor and Nurse Shortages. All frontline NHS and social care staff to pay zero basic rate tax for 3 years. This will help retain existing staff and attract many who have left to return. End training caps for all UK medical students. Write off student fees pro rata per year over 10 years of NHS service for all doctors, nurses and medical staff.
Use Independent Healthcare Capacity We will harness independent and not-for-profit health provision in the UK and overseas.
Tax Relief of 20% on all Private Healthcare and Insurance This will improve care for all by relieving pressure on the NHS. Those who rely on the NHS will enjoy faster, better care. Independent healthcare capacity will grow rapidly, providing competition and reducing costs.
Thereafter: Put Patients in Charge With a New NHS Voucher Scheme NHS Patients will receive a voucher for private treatment if they can’t see a GP within 3 days.
For a consultant it would be 3 weeks. For an operation, 9 weeks. Services will always be free at the point of use.
Improve Efficiency. Cut Waste and Unnecessary Managers.
Operating theatres must be open on weekends.
Rotas must be planned further in advance. Nail down better prices using economies of scale.
Review all NHS Private Finance Contracts for significant savings potential. Charge those who fail to attend medical appointments without notice.
Abolish the NHS Race and Health Observatory.
Save A&E.
Cut waiting times with a campaign of ‘Pharmacy First, GP Second, A&E Last’. We will offer tax incentives for new pharmacies and those who employ more staff to assist in relieving pressure on A&E.
Excess Deaths and Vaccine Harms.
Public Inquiry.
Excess deaths are nearly as high as they were during the Covid pandemic. Young people are over-represented.
NHS.
The NHS Needs Urgent Reform “Patients first. Rapid care. Cutting waste - an NHS to be proud of again.”
NHS PLEDGES COSTS = £17 BILLION PA.
Net Zero is pushing up bills, damaging British industries like steel, and making us less secure.
Reform UK will ensure that our elderly people can live with dignity through long-term reforms funded by a growing economy.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE FIRST 100 DAYS: Commence Royal Commission of Inquiry into Social Care System.
A national plan is critical for a sustainable social care system. The sector needs flexibility, tax incentives, VAT breaks and less waste. Simplify social care through a single funding stream, instead of the split between NHS and Local Authorities. More funding will be needed when a national plan is agreed.
Stop the Offshore Taxpayer Rip Off.
Some larger care home providers are avoiding tax on hundreds of millions of profits through complex offshore property company structures and high interest shareholder loans. This has to end.
Thereafter: Review Pension Provision.
The current pension system is riddled with complexity, huge cost and poor returns leading to less uptake. Countries like Australia do savings and pensions much better and cheaper than we do and from a much younger age.
End the Mineworkers Pension Scandal.
We accept the Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Committee 2021 recommendations in full to amend the Mineworkers Pension Scheme arrangements so that all the scheme surpluses accrue to the Mineworkers.
PENSIONS AND SOCIAL CARE.
Our Elderly Deserve to be Treated with Dignity and Respect.
“Reform UK will treat our elderly with the respect they deserve.”