Our plan for safer streets and justice for victims of crime.
The Conservatives will always back our brave police and security services with the powers and resources needed to keep our country safe and we will always work to deliver a justice system that is fair to victims and sees ofenders repay their debt to society.
Under the Conservatives, violent crime has fallen by 44% since 2010 and neighbourhood crime is down 48%. Reofending has fallen from over 30% in 2010 to 25%. We have recruited 20,000 police ofcers, delivered 6,000 prison places as part of the largest prison expansion since the Victorian era and deported over 18,000 foreign national ofenders since 2019 alone. We will: ❱ Give every neighbourhood an additional police ofcer by recruiting 8,000 more police ofcers to patrol communities and catch criminals in every ward in the country.
These full time, fully warranted ofcers will be dedicated to neighbourhood policing.
❱ Back the police, by giving ofcers new powers and tools to catch criminals, including technology like facial recognition and powers to seize knives and track down stolen property. We will always back the police in the lawful and professional use of force, alongside a fair and proportionate accountability system.
❱ Restore public trust in policing. We will license police ofcers for specialist roles, as we do already for frearms ofcers.
We will legislate to ensure ofcers are appropriately vetted during their service and those who fail can be sacked.
We will foster greater collaboration between the National Crime Agency and Counter Terrorism Policing.
We will urgently introduce Martyn’s Law, in tribute to Martyn Hett, who was tragically killed alongside 21 others in the Manchester Arena terrorist attack in 2017. This will ensure premises are better prepared for terrorist attacks by requiring them to take proportionate steps to mitigate risks.
We will toughen up community sentencing by increasing the use of community payback and electronic tagging, so criminals pay their debt to society and communities witness justice being served. We will fund every police force to roll out Hotspot Policing, which has cut anti-social behaviour by up to 50% in some areas.
We will keep turning the tide against fraudsters.
In the last year we have reduced fraud by 13%, including through our new National Fraud Squad with 400 ofcers now in post. We will ban SIM farms, which are used to send bulk messages for fraudulent texts, and ban cold calls on fnancial products so fraudsters cannot dupe people into buying fake investments.
Tackling violence against women and girls We have made violence against women and girls a strategic policing requirement for the frst time, making clear to the police that these crimes are as signifcant as terrorism, serious and organised crime and child sexual abuse.
We have strengthened the law to punish predators with new ofences for stalking, controlling or coercive behaviour, non-fatal strangulation and sufocation, sharing of intimate images or ‘revenge porn’, non-consensual taking of images of a woman breastfeeding, ‘up skirting’ and raised the maximum penalties for harassment. We will legislate to create new ofences for spiking, the creation of sexualised deepfake images and taking intimate images without consent.
We will support victims of domestic abuse including through our Domestic Abuse Act, which created a statutory defnition of domestic abuse and gave new powers to police and the courts.
 We will toughen sentencing for murders that take place within the context of domestic abuse with new aggravating factors, such as if they involve coercive and controlling behaviour or gratuitous attacks. We will introduce a 25-year prison term for domestic murders, regardless of whether a weapon is used. Those who kill their domestic abusers will not face the same starting point. This will be accompanied by a review of homicide sentencing, looking to close loopholes that allow some killers to get of lightly.
We will introduce an aggravating factor for murders that happen in the context of ‘rough sex’, so it is never used as an excuse to get a lighter sentence.
We have increased rape prosecutions by 56% since 2010 and we will ensure rape victims get the justice and support they deserve, with a new investigatory model for rape for police forces and prosecutors and pre-recorded cross- examination for victims in all Crown courts.
We will carefully consider the recommendations of Baroness Bertin’s Independent Review of Pornography and ensure we have the right safeguards in place to protect against any harmful impacts of the industry.
A justice system that delivers for victims and the public.
We will toughen sentencing for the worst ofenders. We have already ended Labour’s automatic halfway release for violent and serious sexual ofenders. We will make life imprisonment without parole mandatory for more of the most heinous murderers and require rapists and other serious sexual ofenders to spend the whole of their sentences behind bars.
We will toughen sentences for knife crime, grooming gangs and assaults against retail workers and combat the ability of serious organised crime gangs to use new technology to harm the public. We will prioritise further measures to crack down on hyper-prolifc ofenders.
We will empower judges to require ofenders to attend hearings or face an increased sentence. We will stand frmly behind the legal doctrine of joint enterprise meaning that those who assist in crimes, from the getaway driver to the weapon supplier, can be held accountable.
We will build four new prisons, completing our programme of 20,000 new prison places by 2030. We will make it easier to build prisons in appropriate places by scrapping legacy EU rules and streamlining the planning system.
We will remove more Foreign National Ofenders by increasing removals under the Early Removal Scheme and negotiating more Prisoner Transfer Agreements.
We will maintain the ban on prisoners voting from jail.
We will turn criminals away from the cycle of reofending, investing in rehabilitative services such as drug treatment, education and employment. We will deliver our ten-year drugs plan to cut crime and help people rebuild their lives away from crime.
Our Victims and Prisoners Act ensures victims are protected and supported, including that those afected by major disasters such as Hillsborough, the Manchester Arena bombing and the Grenfell Tower fre can get the help they need, when they need it, through a permanent Independent Public Advocate.
We will expand the provision of legal aid at inquests related to major incidents where the Independent Public Advocate is appointed or in the aftermath of terrorist incidents.
We will bring the mandatory reporting provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill into force as soon as possible. We will design a redress scheme for the victims of child sexual abuse in institutional settings that refects their needs.
We will ensure this includes the victims of grooming gangs and make a national apology to grooming gang victims.
We will ensure sex ofenders cannot evade justice or conceal their identity by restricting sex ofenders from changing their names.
We will cut the Covid court backlog by keeping open Nightingale courtrooms, funding sitting days and investing in court maintenance.
And we will continue to digitise court processes and expand the use of remote hearings. We will match fund 100 criminal law pupillages to speed up justice for victims and will continue to ensure access to justice through legal aid provision.
We will expand our Pathfnder Courts pilot in family court proceedings and continue mediation vouchers to help more families resolve private law child arrangements without an acrimonious court battle.
We will support our world class legal services sector, including through an Arbitration Bill.
We will help individuals and small businesses bring cases against wealthier opponents with legislation to support third party funding of litigation.
A plan to counter extremism and to protect our streets In recent months we have seen shocking increases in protests being used as a cover for extremist disruption and criminality. We cannot allow a small and vocal minority to destroy our democratic values. That is why we unveiled a new extremism defnition under which certain groups that promote an ideology based on violence, hatred or intolerance will be blocked from government funding and meeting ofcials.
We have passed tough new laws to curb disruptive protests. Our Public Order Act 2023 gave the police new powers to intervene where protests cause serious disruption to communities, leading to the arrests of over 600 Just Stop Oil and Extinction Rebellion protestors in London alone. We will introduce further powers to ban face coverings, pyrotechnics and climbing on war memorials.
We will strengthen police powers to prevent protests or marches that pose a risk of serious disorder, by allowing police to take into account the cumulative impact of protests.
We will ban protests outside schools to stop mobs from intimidating teachers and children.
We will always support teachers to uphold and promote fundamental British values and ensure they are protected from accusations of blasphemy.
We will place a duty on the police and prosecutors to publish regular guidance on the statements, chants or symbols, for example, the swastika or the term ‘jihad’, that in the context of political protest may constitute an ofence. We will explore ways for the police to recover some of the costs of policing disruptive protests from the groups that organise them.
We will also ensure our elected representatives get the protection needed to represent their constituents without fear.
Clamping down on tax avoidance.
It is vital we make sure people and companies are paying the tax they owe. That’s why, since 2010, Conservative Governments have introduced over 200 measures to tackle tax non-compliance. In total across all the fscal events we have delivered since 2010, the OBR has scored these measures as raising £95 billion across the forecasts it has produced – £6.7 billion for each year. Building on that, we will raise at least a further £6 billion a year from tackling tax avoidance and evasion by the end of the Parliament.
 Our plan to support families.
The Conservatives have a plan to deliver a brighter future for the UK, one where families are supported and children are given the best chance to gain the skills they need to succeed. We are delivering the largest ever expansion of childcare in history: ❱ Working parents of two-year-olds are now able to access 15 hours of free childcare, with over 200,000 two-year-olds already beneftting from the ofer.
❱ From September 2024, eligible parents of children between nine months and two years old will also be able to access 15 hours free childcare.
❱ From September 2025, all eligible parents with children from nine months old to when they start school will be able to access 30 hours of free childcare a week.
❱ Once the roll out is completed, families will save an average of £6,900 per year.
To help the childcare sector expand we have committed to increasing hourly funding rates over the next two years by an estimated £500 million and are helping the sector, including childminders, to hire more staf, create more places and spend less time on paperwork. And to give working parents more fexibility, we are investing £300 million so that all parents can access wraparound childcare before and after school by September 2026.
But families’ needs don’t stop when children start primary school, which is why Family Hubs support families all the way up until children reach adulthood. They back families in the early years, helping with things like breastfeeding support, antenatal care and early learning interventions, in addition to services like relationship support, stopping smoking services and youth services. Our plan has already delivered Family Hubs in over 75 local authorities. We will go further to deliver a Family Hub in every local authority in England.
We will improve the experiences of children in social care, because every child deserves to live in a safe and loving home. We will create more places in children’s homes while prioritising keeping families together where that’s best for the child through our Kinship Care Strategy and helping children grow up in loving adoptive families where that is a better option. We will also support those leaving care with housing, education and employment, in addition to expanding befriending and mentoring programmes for care leavers.
Cutting tax for families In April, we raised the threshold at which individuals begin to lose Child Beneft from £50,000 to £60,000 and halved the rate at which it is withdrawn. This is the right thing for families and the right thing for the economy.
But it still isn’t fair that single earner households can start losing their Child Beneft when a household with two working parents and a much higher total income can keep it in full.
We will end this unfairness by moving to a household rather than individual basis for Child Beneft. So nobody is worse of than under the current system, we will set the combined household income at which a family will start losing Child Beneft at £120,000 and gradually remove it until household income reaches £160,000, above which families will no longer receive Child Beneft. This will beneft over 700,000 households, each gaining an average of £1,480 a year.
 Protecting children online.
Digital technology is a force for good. But as technology develops, we need to respond to the concerns many parents have.
Children are spending much more of their time using screens, often unsupervised, with research fnding 63% of eight to 11-year-olds are now using social media. We also know that the number of children sufering from mental illness is rising dramatically and children spend less time playing, sleeping and socialising.
In the last decade, we have done more to protect children online than any other country.
From next year, our Online Safety Act will make it a legal requirement for social media frms to protect children from illegal or harmful content online. This includes fning social media companies who shirk their responsibilities to keep children safe.
But we need to do more to protect young people and empower parents to make decisions in the best interests of their children.
We will put our guidance on banning mobile phones in the school day on a statutory footing which will require all schools to operate a ban, as the best schools already do. We will provide funding for schools to help them ban mobile phones where they need it.
We will urgently consult on introducing further parental controls over access to social media.
We know this is a complex area and we need more efective age verifcation and parental controls. That’s why we will consult widely to get this right, including developing the necessary technology, in partnership with other countries who are considering similar measures. We expect to build on the existing responsibilities set out for social media companies under the Online Safety Act.