We will spend £36 billion of HS2 savings on transport projects that will beneft more people, in more places, more quickly. Every penny saved in the North or Midlands will be spent there. Savings from our new plan for Euston, which will see 10,000 new homes built, have freed up £6.5 billion for transport across the rest of the country.
Labour has no plan. They neither support the second phase of HS2 nor our alternative package of investment, meaning they won’t back schemes their own local leaders say will transform their areas. We will: ❱ Invest £4.7 billion for smaller cities, towns and rural areas in the North and Midlands to spend on their transport priorities. This will cut congestion and upgrade local bus and train stations.
❱ Invest a record £8.3 billion of investment to fll potholes and resurface roads. We will bring forward funding into this fnancial year and the next.
❱ Back our city regions with an additional £8.55 billion to spend on their local priorities.
We will scrap rules that stop Mayors investing in strategic roads.
❱ Deliver our plan for Northern Powerhouse Rail bringing more frequent trains, more capacity and faster journeys. We have committed £12 billion on top of our HS2 savings to deliver the section of Northern Powerhouse Rail between Manchester and Liverpool. Savings from HS2 enable us to fund electrifcation to Hull and build a new station in Bradford.
❱ Boost rail connectivity in the Midlands, with £1.75 billion to fund the Midlands Rail Hub in full. This will improve journey times and deliver more frequent rail services at 50 stations, benefting over seven million people. We will upgrade the line between Newark and Nottingham to halve journey times between Nottingham and Leeds.
❱ Provide an additional £1 billion to support hundreds of new bus routes across the North and Midlands.
❱ Improve accessibility at 100 train stations, starting with the 50 stations announced in May.
❱ Deliver upgrades to railways in the South West, including the line through Dawlish, the Energy Coast Line in Cumbria and the Ely Junction scheme in East Anglia.
❱ Electrify the North Wales Main Line with £1 billion of investment and alleviate pinch points on the A75 between Gretna and Stranraer.
❱ Reopen Beeching lines and stations to reconnect communities around the country, building on the success of the Dartmoor Line in the South West. We are committed to all the schemes set out in the Network North Command Paper.
This comes on top of £44 billion of funding for Network Rail over the next fve years and our investment in the Transpennine Route Upgrade, laying the foundations for Northern Powerhouse Rail. We will complete HS2 between London Euston and the West Midlands and support the growth of the rail freight sector.
We have invested £40 billion in England’s strategic roads between 2015 and 2025, with further investment to come in the next Road Investment Strategy, ensuring we can deliver major roads including the Lower Thames Crossing and the A303. This is alongside the road schemes set out in our Network North plan, including the A1 between Morpeth and Ellingham.
Automated vehicles will be on British roads in the next Parliament, thanks to our new world- leading legislation. We will support people to choose electric cars by ensuring our charging infrastructure is truly nationwide, including rapid charging and delivering the Zero Emission Vehicle Mandate to support manufacturers to safeguard skilled British jobs.
We will support the growth and decarbonisation of our aviation sector. We will back British Sustainable Aviation Fuel through our SAF  Speeding up infrastructure delivery.
mandate, an industry-backed revenue support mechanism and investment in future aviation technology. We will support domestic fights including through Public Service Obligations, protecting vital routes within the UK, including to islands and remote areas.
We will back our maritime sector, including shipping and ports, as it decarbonises. Recognising the current challenges with cross-Solent transport, we will establish a review to explore all options to provide more choice and drive down fares. We will foster our science and innovation expertise in the We can only achieve our infrastructure ambitions if we continue to simplify the planning system to make it easier to build, faster. We will speed up the average time it takes to sign off major infrastructure projects from four years to one. We will: ❱ Introduce reforms to outdated EU red tape to better protect nature while enabling the building of new homes, new prisons and new energy schemes. Along with the reforms to the EU’s bureaucratic environmental impact assessment regime that we have already started, these changes will speed up local and national infrastructure planning systems.
❱ Ensure any requirements to offset the impact of new infrastructure and homes on an area are proportionate, without compromising environmental outcomes.
❱ Reduce the cost of infrastructure by allowing quicker changes to consented projects.
❱ Ensure National Policy Statements are regularly updated.
❱ Focus the role of statutory consultees in the planning system on improving projects in line with clearer objectives, rather than piecemeal requirements that add delays.
❱ End frivolous legal challenges that frustrate infrastructure delivery by amending the law so judicial reviews that don’t have merit do not waste court time.
space industry.