CLEAR PLAN BOLD ACTION SECURE FUTURE.
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2024.
 We are restoring our economic stability after Covid and Ukraine. Infation is down, real wages are up, growth has returned – and we are cutting taxes to give working people financial security. This did not happen by accident. The economy is turning a corner because we built strong economic foundations before the pandemic and we have stuck to our plan.
We must stick to this plan and take bold action to secure the future of our nation and society.
In the next decade, we’ll face challenges to our energy and national security from foreign conficts; to our border from uncontrolled and illegal migration; to our economy from global shocks and to our society from those seeking to divide and disempower communities.
Dealing with these challenges requires a clear plan and bold action.
We have that plan and the courage to take the bold steps necessary to build a secure future for you and your family.
A future where hard work and doing the right thing is always rewarded, not punished with higher taxes and hidden green levies, or discouraged with unconstrained welfare.
A future where aspiration and opportunity are celebrated and young people always get the skills they need to succeed.
A future where public services, like the NHS, serve citizens not vested interests, and every citizen upholds British values of decency, democracy and service.
A future, where national, border, energy and food security are put frst, not taken for granted, and immigration is never allowed to run out of control.
A future where family is always supported and communities decide their own priorities, rather than having them imposed from above.
A future where we can have pride – in ourselves, in our communities and in our country.
There is only one way to secure that future – and that is to vote Conservative on 4 July.
We must stick with the plan – a plan that has given four million more people the security and purpose of a job, cut taxes for 29 million working people, protected pensioners with the Triple Lock, delivered more than 2.5 million homes, recruited record numbers of police officers to cut crime by more than 50%, recruited record numbers of teachers to help our children become the best readers in the West, delivered the largest sustained increase in defence spending since the end of the Cold War and got Brexit done.
The alternative is we go back to square one.
To a fragile economy under Labour driven by unfunded spending, higher taxes on working families and debt piling up for future generations to pay of. And where immigration, crime and defence are not taken seriously.
On 4 July, choose lower immigration, lower taxes and protected pensions. Choose a secure future with the Conservatives.
The Rt Hon Rishi Sunak Prime Minister and Leader of the Conservative and Unionist Party.
Bold actions to deliver a secure future for our country and for your family.