Our plan to deliver better health and social care.
Since 2010, we have invested more in the NHS than at any other point in its history. We will continue to increase NHS spending above infation in each year of the next Parliament.
During Covid, we saw the NHS at its fnest, with extraordinary acts of service and sacrifce from health and care professionals. Throughout the pandemic, the Conservative Government acted to save lives, protect the NHS and deliver a world leading vaccine programme. But dealing with a once-in-a-generation pandemic put a strain on our health and social care system and it has taken time to recover.
Thanks to record funding, we now have more doctors and nurses than ever before, delivering record numbers of appointments.
We are committed to accelerating the NHS’s recovery from the pandemic, delivering safe and efective services and ongoing improvements in waiting times for primary, elective, cancer and emergency care. We will return performance to the levels set out in the NHS Constitution by the end of the next Parliament.
We will invest in and modernise the NHS. We have taken the long-term decision to train the staf the NHS needs, by backing the NHS’s frst ever Long-Term Workforce Plan. By the end of the next Parliament, there will be 92,000 more nurses and 28,000 more doctors in the NHS than in 2023. We are also delivering record increases in training places for other clinicians, such as midwives and paramedics and we are boosting training places for dentists and other dental care professionals by 40%. We will improve working conditions for all NHS staf.
We are committed to supporting a high-quality and sustainable social care system, building on our additional investment of up to £8.6 billion over the last two years. At the next Spending Review, we will give local authorities a multi-year funding settlement to support social care and will take forward the reforms in our ‘People at the Heart of Care’ White Paper.
Bringing health and care closer to patients.
The NHS Long-Term Workforce Plan will help shift care away from hospitals and into local communities. To support this, we will: ❱ Expand Pharmacy First, including for menopause support, contraception and treatment for chest infections, freeing up 20 million GP appointments a year.
❱ Build or modernise 250 GP surgeries, focused on areas of new housing growth.
❱ Build 50 more Community Diagnostic Centres, including in underserved areas, resulting in an additional 2.5 million checks a year.
We will attract and retain a high-quality care workforce, make reforms to shape the market for older people’s housing and support unpaid carers. We will implement our planned reforms to cap social care costs from October 2025.
We will invest in more and better facilities, continuing to deliver 40 new hospitals by 2030 and investing proportionately more in out-of-hospital services over time. We will modernise NHS primary care services and bring health and care closer to patients.
Our Dental Recovery Plan will unlock 2.5 million more NHS dental appointments, through a patient premium to encourage dentists to take on new NHS patients. We will make further reforms to the dental contract to ensure its future sustainability and we will ensure newly qualifed dentists have to work in the NHS for a number of years or pay back their training costs. We will promote good oral health through our ‘Smile for Life’ programme. Rural and coastal communities will be better served through ‘golden hellos’ to encourage dentists to work in these areas, and through new dental vans.
We will further improve access to NHS services across England by training more staf in rural and coastal areas. For the frst time the NHS Constitution will refect the bespoke healthcare needs of rural and coastal communities and the need for the NHS to tailor services accordingly.
 We will protect and promote patients’ right to choose the NHS service that is right for them. We will grow opportunities for all types of providers - NHS, charity or independent sector - to ofer services free of charge to NHS patients, where these meet NHS costs and standards.
We will extend patients’ right to choose to more NHS community services over time, including diagnostics, talking therapies and other mental health services. We will fully roll out Martha’s Rule, giving patients the right to a second opinion.
We will support our world-leading life sciences sector, embracing the opportunities provided by Brexit to pursue nimble and agile regulation, supported by a well-equipped MHRA. We will support research into new treatments, including for Parkinson’s and motor neurone disease and Transforming NHS technology and productivity We will invest £3.4 billion in new technology to transform the NHS for staff and for patients. The NHS Productivity Plan will see NHS productivity grow by 1.9% a year from 2025-26 – unlocking £35 billion of cumulative savings by the end of the decade. We will: ❱ Make the NHS App the single front door for NHS services. Patients will use the App to access their medical records, order prescriptions, book vaccine appointments, access a digital red book and manage their hospital appointments.
❱ Use AI to free up doctors’ and nurses’ time for frontline patient care.
❱ Replace tens of thousands of outdated computers, slashing the 13 million hours in doctors’ and nurses’ time lost to IT issues every year and digitise NHS processes through the Federated Data Platform.
❱ Fund technology to help clinicians read MRI and CT scans more quickly and accurately, speeding up results for 130,000 patients every year.
❱ Create new incentives for improved performance, rewarding the best performing providers of care.
secure more commercial clinical trials. We will remove bureaucratic obstacles to the use of new medicines, such as the NHS Budget Impact Test and will align NHS England’s cost-efectiveness thresholds for new medicines indications with those used by NICE. We will implement a new medtech pathway so that cost-efective medtech, including AI, is rapidly adopted throughout the NHS.
We will cut waste and bureaucracy in the NHS, reducing the number of managers by 5,500, releasing £550 million for frontline services and simplifying and streamlining oversight and accountability. We will carefully consider the implications of the review of the whistleblowing framework for the NHS and we will consult on a disbarring regime for NHS managers.
We know that, for most people, poor health comes from living with one or more of six major health conditions: cancer, heart disease, musculoskeletal disorders, mental ill-health, dementia and respiratory disease. We will publish and implement a Major Conditions Strategy to prevent these conditions from occurring and ensure those living with them receive the best possible care. We will also take forward our Rare Diseases Action Plan. We will continue to modernise autism and learning disability services.
We will bring forward our landmark Tobacco and Vapes Bill in our frst King’s Speech. We will continue to tackle childhood and adult obesity and will legislate to restrict the advertising of products high in fat, salt and sugar. We will gather new evidence on the impact of ultra- processed food to support people to make healthier choices.
We will roll out new digital health checks to 250,000 more people every year, helping to prevent hundreds of strokes and heart attacks.
We will take forward the NHS Vaccination Strategy.
We are implementing the HIV Action Plan, which will end new HIV transmissions by 2030. Subject to evaluation, we will expand HIV opt-out testing in emergency departments in England.
We will prioritise women’s health, following publication of the frst ever Women’s Health Strategy in 2022. To support women further, we will: ❱ Bring forward a comprehensive national strategy for maternity care as recommended by the APPG on Birth Trauma’s inquiry.
❱ Deliver additional funding for maternal safety and improve access to mental health services for new mums, improve perinatal pelvic health services to prevent and support women with birth injuries and postnatal appointments dedicated to checking mums, not just their babies.
❱ Expand women’s health hubs so that every integrated care system has at least one hub up and running.
❱ Roll out fracture liaison services to every region, reaching 100% coverage by 2030 as osteoporosis disproportionately impacts women.
❱ Support continued research into disparities in maternity care through the National Institute for Health and Care Research.
We will complete the implementation of the Cass Review, protecting young people questioning their gender from ideologically- driven care and ensuring that NHS services follow evidence-based best practice. We have already stopped the routine use by the NHS of puberty blockers for gender dysphoria and will legislate to permanently prevent their private prescription and supply.
We will amend the NHS Constitution so that it recognises every patient’s right to request single-sex accommodation and same-sex intimate care. We will not allow the word ‘woman’ to be erased by health services. Words such as ‘breastfeeding’ and ‘mother’ will not be replaced by ‘chestfeeding’ and ‘birthing parent’.
We will introduce a new licensing scheme and age limits for non-surgical cosmetic procedures, ensuring services are administered by suitably qualifed and trained professionals.
Improving mental health support.
Mental health should have parity of esteem with physical health. To support children, young people and adults with their mental health, we will: ❱ Expand coverage of Mental Health Support Teams from 50% to 100% of schools and colleges in England by 2030.
❱ Open early support hubs for those aged 11-25 in every local community by 2030.
❱ Increase the planned expansion of NHS Talking Therapies by 50%, supporting people with anxiety, stress and depression.
❱ Boost the capacity of Individual Placement and Support for Severe Mental Illness by 140,000 places.
❱ Pass a new law to provide better treatment and support for severe mental health needs in the first session of the next Parliament.
We will maintain the position that assisted dying is a matter of conscience and will respect the will of Parliament. Debates on assisted dying should never distract from the importance of delivering high- quality palliative care services and we will continue to support children’s and adults’ hospices.
We have made a wholehearted and unequivocal apology, on behalf of successive governments of all parties, for the infected blood scandal. As one of the last acts of Parliament, legislation was passed that brings the Infected Blood Compensation Authority into existence and we confrmed Sir Robert Francis as its Interim Chair. We will pay comprehensive compensation to those infected and those afected by this scandal, accepting the principles recommended by the Inquiry. Whatever it costs to deliver the scheme, we will pay it. We will also give a further £210,000 interim payment to living infected benefciaries – those registered with existing infected blood support schemes as well as those who register with a support scheme before the fnal scheme becomes operational and the estates of those who pass away between now and payments being made. A scandal like this must never be allowed to happen again, so we will study the Inquiry’s wide-ranging recommendations and provide a full response to the Inquiry.
