RESTORE THE UNION.
THE REALITY: Our union with GB has been splintered by the Protocol.
OUR MISSION: The reunification of the UK.
 FOREWORD.
As we elect a new Parliament there is no escaping the constitutional affront that Westminster is no longer sovereign over this part of the Kingdom, because of the appalling surrender of powers to a foreign parliament.
To anyone who cares about the Union, this is the core issue. TUV has told you the truth about the iniquitous Protocol from the beginning.
While others have faltered and preferred the baubles of office, TUV has spoken with strength, not weakness.
It is such strength that unionism needs like never before.
So, across the Province, I urge you to vote TUV - No Sea Border.
William Ross TUV President.
 PERSONAL MESSAGE FROM JIM ALLISTER.
This election is overshadowed by the greatest constitutional crisis Northern Ireland has ever faced. Our nation is partitioned by a border in the Irish Sea and unaccountable rule from Brussels dictates many aspects of our lives.
Remarkably, while the rest of the UK is electing MPs to make the laws which govern them, we in Northern Ireland have no say in over 300 areas of law. Those are decided by the EU, where we have no input.
Sadly, the unity once enjoyed across Unionism has been shattered by those who broke their word to you and obtained votes dishonestly in the council elections and indeed Assembly elections when they told you they were opposed to the Sea Border.
At the beginning of the year, the DUP claimed that the Sea Border was gone.
“Zero checks, zero paperwork” was the infamous boast of Jeffery Donaldson with Gavin Robinson standing beside him in support. Now, faced with an election, the tune has changed.
Those who admit they lied to you in February do not deserve your vote in July.
Truth, honesty and integrity still matter in politics.
You can make that clear on 4th July by voting TUV - No Sea Border.
Jim Allister KC MLA TUV Leader.
 IMPACTING ON NATIONAL POLITICS.
In this election, TUV - No Sea Border is offering the people of Northern Ireland the opportunity to vote for truly national politics.
We are campaigning with a common platform with Reform UK meaning the parties have agreed the following: Reform UK and TUV Memorandum of Understanding It is hereby agreed that for the purpose of the upcoming General Election Reform UK and TUV shall cooperate in providing and mutually supporting candidates in Northern Ireland on the basis of the following common platform: • upholding and strengthening the Union between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, including the full restoration of Art 6 of the Act(s) of Union; • equal rights for all citizens within the United Kingdom; • rejection of the Irish Sea border and the subjection of Northern Ireland to EU law and the ECJ; • the completion of a full Brexit so that the United Kingdom in all its parts enjoys full independence and economic freedom; • robust immigration system and controls; • a taxation system, both personal and commercial, which rewards effort.
In all other matters the two parties may develop and advance their own policies in accordance with their ideological outlook.
 Any MPs elected will operate in pursuit of this agreement under a common Whip.
Moreover, going forward, Reform UK and TUV will collaborate in joint political ventures with a view to advancing our shared vision of strengthening the links and political integration of all parts of the United Kingdom. An inclusive rather than disparate United Kingdom is our goal.
Dated 16th March 2024.
This agreement has put the Sea Border, which many seek to suggest is a settled matter, right at the heart of this election campaign. It commits what is now the second largest party in polling UK wide to restore Northern Ireland’s place as a full and equal part of the nation, the removal of the Sea Border and the completion of a Brexit from which the whole of the UK benefits.
For far too long Unionism has been parochial and detached from the politics of the entire nation. The historic link up between TUV and Reform UK changes that.
