POLICING AND JUSTICE.
There is a huge crisis of confidence in the PSNI within the Unionist community.
The reasons are transparent.
Blatant two-tier policing must end. The police’s handling of a number of issues has shattered confidence in the PSNI.
There must be no return to the anti-Protestant discrimination of 50/50.
Recruitment on merit is an imperative from which there must be no departure.
TUV will continue to be vigilant on this issue.
The equivocation of DOJ and the PSNI over who - if anyone - investigates non-terrorist criminality of the IRA, fuels our belief that under the so called ‘peace process’ there is an understanding that there will be a blind eye approach to the extra-curriculum activities of the Provisionals. Such is intolerable and will continue to be pursued by TUV.
In the last Assembly, Jim Allister drafted a Private Members Bill to ban convicted criminals like Gerry Kelly from holding positions on the Policing Board. Sadly, this Bill was defeated by the combined efforts of Sinn Fein, the SDLP and Alliance.
INNOCENT VICTIMS.
TUV believes that we need to radically change the whole approach to the issue of legacy and victims. To this end we demand that: • The definition of victim needs to change to exclude victim makers. Until this root problem is addressed there can be no real progress on victims’ issues.
The innocent must reclaim the word “victim.” • There can be no amnesty. Many victims continue to demand justice and should not be denied this.
• Terrorists have already proved they have no interest in the truth so any form of “truth commission” should be rejected.
• The PSNI should get serious about criminal investigations of historic crimes where evidence exists and political considerations should play no part.
 • The Republic of Ireland should face up to its historic role in facilitating terrorism in Northern Ireland by providing a safe haven for terrorists.
• Legislation on the glorification of terrorism needs to be revisited and applied equally across the UK regardless of the terror group being celebrated.
TUV is opposed to the Legacy Act which has shut the door on justice.
