HEALTH. 
While others claimed they wanted to get back to Stormont to sort the NHS, the reality is that the promises about funding for the National Health Service were forgotten once they were in the door. This year’s budget passed by Stormont was down by 2.3% when compared to what was actually spent by the end of last year.
The provision of a fully functioning and effective NHS is critical to us all. We do not need more deputy directors; we need more doctors and nurses. TUV is opposed to the closure of minor injuries units which will only increase pressures on hospital A & Es.
 Nor should the closure of more local facilities be the default position to save money. Yes, some services may require streamlining, but it must not be about trumping local need.
Our U.K. NHS is of prime importance. It creaked under COVID but came through, though years of underinvestment in our health service took its toll.
Waiting lists are appalling. It is nonsense to suggest that getting devolution back will sort this. The situation in which we now find ourselves is, in large measure, due to Stormont’s failure to prioritise health. Under DUP/SF rule hundreds of beds and associated staff have been removed from Northern Ireland hospitals. All because Stormont, shamefully, had greater priorities.
Today we are paying the price.
Sustaining long term investment in health is a TUV priority. While others would squander millions on the Irish language, north/south structures and so called ‘rights agendas,’ we say put the money into providing more nurses, doctors and beds in our hospitals.
TUV recognises the importance of facing up to the mental health problem.
TUV supports increased funding for Community Mental Health services to support people experiencing mental ill-health in their recovery and to further support early intervention strategies which will help prevent the need for hospital admissions.
We also believe that there is a need for adequate acute psychiatric beds so that anyone who requires an acute hospital bed should be able to access it within their Trust area. No patient should be forced to travel outside their Trust area where they are less likely to benefit from the support of family and friends – something which is vital when it comes to mental wellbeing.
Strenuous efforts are now required to make up the lost ground in meeting general needs, particularly in respect of cancer.
A readily accessible GP service must also be restored, which of itself eases the burden on Emergency Departments. Getting an appointment with a GP should not be a challenge.
The haemorrhaging of skilled nurses and realignment to agencies is robbing our health service of vital staff. The level of reliance on agency staff is astounding and debilitating. The drift to agencies must be disincentivised and loyalty to the NHS rewarded.
The Covid experience demonstrated how swiftly our hospitals can be overwhelmed, not least because of lack of nursing staff. In our Assembly  manifesto, TUV proposed that a Nursing Reserve Service should be created - somewhat akin to the Army Reserve – whereby retired and former nurses could be enlisted, required to keep up with relevant training, modestly remunerated as reserves and available to be called upon in emergency. We will continue to campaign for this.
The primary focus of our NHS is the saving of lives, yet some want it to become an agency for death through the full commissioning of abortion services. TUV, being unashamedly pro-life, opposes such demands by Sinn Fein, and Alliance MLAs.
Halting the pandemic of destruction of the unborn, which abortion on demand represents, is a key TUV goal.
