Building a Fairer, Healthier Country.
The NHS is facing the most serious crisis in its 80-year history. Our most precious national institution is at serious risk, with patients dying in ambulances, record waiting lists for surgery, and cancer survival rates amongst the worst in higher- income countries.
It doesn’t have to be like this. Greens would do things differently. We would choose to treat and pay nurses, doctors and NHS staff fairly, so we don’t lose them overseas. We would increase taxes on the super-rich to fund our national health service properly. And we would fix the broken care system that’s a major cause of problems for the NHS.
The NHS crisis is not an accident: it is the result of deliberate Conservative under-funding that’s seen the NHS undermined and at risk of collapse, paving the way for further privatisation. The Green Party has always proudly defended the NHS against creeping privatisation and we always will.
We are committed to a fully public health service and to keeping the profit motive well away from our NHS.
The Green Party is clear that NHS budgets should recognise the increasing demands of an ageing population and improving treatment options.
Elected Greens will push for: • A steady reduction in waiting lists.
• We would guarantee rapid access to a GP and same day access in case of urgent need.
• Guaranteed access to an NHS dentist for everybody.
• Boosting the pay of NHS staff.
• Restoring local council budgets for public health.
We estimate that to meet these commitments, the NHS in England would require additional annual expenditure of £8bn in the first full year of the next parliament, rising to a total of £28bn in 2030.
We also estimate that additional capital spending of at least £20bn is needed in total over the next five years.
A Green Plan to reduce hospital waiting lists.
The long-term under funding of the NHS has left 6.3 million of us on hospital waiting lists.. We would bring down hospital waiting lists by giving Hospital Trusts clear, long-term, funding commitments, so that they can better plan to deliver better care for us all.
NHS staff have taken unprecedented strike action to raise the alarm about the crisis in our health service. We will prioritise supporting NHS workers, including by providing an immediate one-off budget increase to cover fair wage settlements.
We would invest £20bn in NHS budgets over the life of the parliament for hospital building and repair.
Elected Greens will choose to restore the NHS to health and will ensure that everybody has access to the healthcare they need, when they need it.
Protect our NHS from privatisation – keep our NHS public.
Green MPs will back the NHS Reinstatement Bill to Building a Fairer, Healthier Country abolish wasteful competition within the NHS, re- establish public bodies and public accountability, and restrict the role of commercial companies.
This blueprint is designed to reverse the damage caused by previous governments that have pursued an agenda that the market could make the NHS better. By contrast, Greens will always stand against the marketisation and privatisation of our precious health service and will choose instead to protect our NHS and keep it in public hands.
A Green Plan for increased investment in primary care and public health.
We think it’s vital to invest in primary care: General Practitioners (GPs) are key to both prevention and early diagnosis. The contact GPs have with patients can make a real difference – helping maximise public investment and ensure we all stay healthier for longer, through timely access to diagnosis and to the best and latest treatment.
Choosing to invest in primary care and public health will improve everyone’s quality of life, while also reducing the demand on the rest of the NHS.
Elected Greens will push for: • Increasing the allocation of funding to primary medical care, with additional annual spending reaching £1.5bn by 2030, targeted at areas of greatest need.
• Reducing the administrative burden on GPs, giving them more time face to face with patients. Steps could include allowing hospital doctors to make onward referrals without needing to go back to a patient’s GP.
• A £2bn capital investment in primary care over the next five years.
We would also seek to expand diagnostic capacity in communities. This would help to ensure people are diagnosed early and have more chance of a positive outcome.
Elected Greens will push for: • Public health to be a cross-government priority.
• Restoring public health budgets to 2015/16 levels with an immediate increase of £1.5bn.
Smoking cessation, drug and alcohol treatment and sexual health services all need to be properly funded.
• A cross-governmental approach to health.
There are a range of interventions across this Manifesto that support healthier lives, from improved food labelling, free school meals, active travel and local government investment in sport.
• A National Commission to agree an evidenced based approach to reform of the UK’s counterproductive drug laws. This will allow the UK to move towards a legally regulated market that stops criminal supply and profiteering, and that reduces harm including by preventing children accessing drugs.
NHS Dentistry.
Successive governments have failed to properly fund NHS dentistry, expecting dentists to treat patients at a loss. This choice is one of the reasons for the scandals of patients pulling out their own teeth and of so many children being unable to access a dentist that tooth decay is now the top reason for child hospital admissions.
Elected Greens will push for a new contract for NHS dentists that ensures everybody who needs an NHS dentist has access to one.
Additional investment in NHS dentistry, reaching £3bn a year by 2030, would transform the availability of appointments and end the scandal of dental treatment deserts.
Elected Greens will campaign for funding to allow community hubs and primary care to provide a roll-out of free dental nursing for children and those on low incomes. This model would deliver preventative work and make referrals into NHS care pathways following oral health checks.
Caring with Fairness, Compassion and Dignity Investing in and supporting our health workers We will tackle the crisis in staff retention through pushing for an immediate and additional increase to the budgets for NHS staff costs, to ensure salaries are fair and reflect the essential skills and dedication of the NHS workforce.
Elected Greens will support the junior doctors’ call for pay restoration. It’s foolish and irresponsible to continue to invest hundreds of thousands of pounds in training and then pay them so poorly.
We need to value junior doctors, so they stay in the NHS and make it stronger.
We cannot allow NHS salaries to decline further: NHS professionals are vital to a healthy and happy society, and we should value them with pay and conditions to reflect this.
National Cancer Plan.
We will commit to a National Cancer Control Plan to include: • Reducing cases through investment in public health measures, such as interventions on food, alcohol and tobacco.
• Meet the existing NHS target of 75% of cases diagnosed at stage 1 or stage 2 by 2028 though investment in primary care and enhanced screening.
• Using the unique information the NHS has, as a public health system that cares for us from cradle to the grave, to deliver treatment through publicly funded research.
Mental health Elected Greens will ensure that the rights of those struggling with their mental health are respected and that a legal framework supports all people to live fulfilling lives.
Elected Greens will focus on enabling major improvements to mental health care to put it on a truly equal footing with physical health care. This will include ensuring that everyone who needs it can access evidence-based mental health therapies within 28 days.
We will ensure that tailored and specific provision is readily available for the particular needs of communities of colour, children and adolescents, older people and Lesbian, Gay Bisexual, Trans, Intersex, Queer and Asexual (LGBTIQA+) communities.
We will also push for more accessible and prompt mental health needs assessments for children and adolescents. The investment in primary care set out above will create easier access to these services in all communities.
We will ensure that neurodivergent children and those with special needs are adequately supported, including in the school system, to live rich and fulfilling lives.
We will provide a trained and paid counsellor in every primary and secondary school, and every sixth-form college. This work will be supported through bursaries to train counsellors from underrepresented backgrounds to ensure we have sufficient culturally aware counsellors for our diverse population.
Assisted dying.
Elected Greens will back changing the law on assisted dying. We support a humane and dignified approach to terminal illness, allowing people to choose to end their lives to avoid prolonging unnecessary suffering, if this is their clear and settled will. Proper safeguards would need to be put in place.
End new cases of HIV by 2030 Elected Greens will work towards no more HIV transmissions by 2030, advocating for a joined-up approach using proven actions, including access to the HIV prevention pill online, in pharmacies and from GP services. We will renew successful opt- out HIV testing programmes in A&Es in all areas with a high prevalence of HIV.
There is a crisis in social care, with over 400,000 people awaiting care, reviews, payments or assessments. There are 150,000 staff vacancies in the care sector. In England there are estimated to be 4.7 million unpaid carers.
The failure by successive governments to address this crisis has created problems for our health service more widely. Greens believe that health and care services go hand in hand. We would choose to invest in both, as part of our commitment to a country where everybody can look forward to compassion and dignity at any stage in their lives when they need extra support.
To address the social care crisis elected Greens will push for: • Free personal care to ensure dignity in old age and for disabled people.
• Increased pay rates and a career structure for carers to rebuild the care workforce.
• Investment of £20bn per year.
Free personal care.
The Green Party believes free social care is fundamental to a functioning welfare state.
Elected Greens will push for the introduction of free personal care along the lines successfully brought in by the Scottish Government.
For those still living at home, access to free personal care will enable earlier intervention and access to help to maintain independence and wellbeing. For those living in residential settings, the personal care elements will be fully funded, alongside a tapered approach to other costs based on the level of their income. For those struggling to afford the accommodation element of residential care, local authorities need to be properly funded to provide the right level of financial support.
Better care for all.
Elected Greens will bring together local authorities, trade unions and private providers to establish a career structure for carers, ensuring there is a pathway to progression that includes training and qualifications. This would have national pay, terms and conditions for all care workers and a proper workforce plan.
Elected Greens will also change the working visa system to end the exploitation of overseas workers in the care sector. This would make it illegal for agents to charge commission and would ensure that carers are free to change employer in the UK.
Elected Greens will campaign for ‘Gloria’s Law’, giving everybody the right to at least one essential Care Supporter (a person important to them such as a relative or friend) when they are using health or care services.
Disabled people.
Consecutive Conservative governments have undermined the limited progress made by disabled people to live dignified lives as valued members of society. Benefits have been cut, and access to education, work and parliamentary access schemes designed to improve the inclusion of disabled people have been decimated.
We need to ensure that everybody can lead full, meaningful lives, can work if they choose, and access the help and support they need. Disabled people have as much of a right to control their day-to-day lives and their long-term futures as non-disabled people.
Elected Greens will: • Restore the value of disability benefits with an immediate uplift of 5%.
• End the unfair targeting of carers and disabled people on benefits.
• Oppose plans to replace Personal Independence Payments (PIP) cash payments with ‘vouchers’, and in the long term reform intrusive eligibility tests like PIP.
• Make it mandatory for councils to provide free transport for 16–18-year-old pupils with Special Educational Needs and Disability.
• Ensure disabled workers have the in-job support they need, as well as proper pay and conditions.
• Champion the right to inclusive welfare support, and housing under the principles of universal design.