Real Hope.
Real Change.
2024 Manifesto for a Fairer, Greener Country,  Green Party Co-leaders Carla Denyer & Adrian Ramsay.
The Green Party’s Manifesto for a Fairer, Greener Country This general election is taking place during an ongoing cost of living crisis, in an increasingly volatile world. No wonder so many of us feel anxious and are losing hope in the future.
We live in one of the richest countries on the planet, and yet nurses are using food banks, our children’s schools are crumbling, a roof over our heads is all too often unaffordable, and a hospital appointment or a dentist is like gold dust.
Our promise to you is that all this can change. We can create a greener, fairer country together – one in which we are all safer, happier and more fulfilled.
It will take MPs prepared to make brave, principled choices on your behalf. And it will take the kinds of policies set out in this manifesto, and for which elected Green MPs will fight hard every single day for you.
The election is also taking place against the background of a climate emergency. Since the last election, there have been an increasing number of days and months in which global temperature increases have breached 1.5 o C, an increase that would make human life on earth unliveable.
Despite commitments from the United Nations, national and local governments, corporations and individuals, greenhouse gas emissions are still rising. And our understanding of what this means is increasing too: we know that the social and economic impacts of climate breakdown are already being felt and will continue to be far worse than previously imagined.
As a political party, we believe in offering hope. And we believe in following the science and speaking the truth, too.
This manifesto sets out what we think is achievable given the failure of successive governments to prepare with anything like the urgency and ambition that climate scientists have been telling us is needed for decades.
The current UK commitment to net zero by 2050 fails to reflect that we can – and must – do so much more. That we can and must make the right political choices in order to transition at speed to a decarbonised economy. One that’s no longer in hock to the fossil fuel giants, but instead runs on clean, green and cheap renewables. An economy in which it’s cheaper to heat our homes, to get out and about and to run a business.
And this manifesto sets out too how fairness can and must run through every part of the change that’s coming – from training the new workforce that will be needed to transform our economy, to investing in our vital public services, to lifting all of us up through a compassionate welfare system.
The solutions to the climate crisis are the same as those needed to end the cost of living and inequality crises, making the future not just more liveable but fairer for us all too. Throughout this manifesto, you’ll find examples of how climate action means better public services, warmer homes, stronger communities and a restored natural world.
Voting Green on 4th July is your way of showing you believe in our shared future. We believe the ambitious plans we are outlining here are not just possible but essential.
A Green vote is the only vote that counts if you want a secure and happy future on a safe planet.
A Green vote means choosing real change and real hope.