Phasing out fossil fuels.
It is dangerous and reckless to extract more fossil fuels in an accelerating climate emergency. Green MPs will push the next government to stop all new fossil fuel extraction projects in the United Kingdom and to cancel recently issued fossil fuel licences, such as for Rosebank. We will also end all subsidies to the oil and gas industries.
We will introduce a carbon tax on all fossil fuels, whether produced here or imported. The tax would be proportional to the greenhouse gas emissions produced when fuel is burnt. We would raise the carbon tax rate progressively over a decade, reflecting the cost to the planet of coal, oil and gas and driving their rapid replacement with cheaper, renewable sources of energy.
Accelerating clean energy investment and delivery.
The UK’s current climate targets do not reflect the urgency of the climate crisis or what is required by global justice. We would push the government to transition to a zero-carbon society as soon as possible, and more than a decade ahead of 2050.
By diverting investment away from renewables, nuclear power is a distraction and a waste of time and money. Instead with investment in interconnectors and grid level storage, it’s possible to decarbonise the energy system before 2030.
Acting with more ambition will deliver: a zero- carbon electricity supply; security of supply over short and long periods of low generation; sufficient electricity for all cars and vans to be electric, for all homes and buildings to stop using fossil fuels, and for most industry to transition to clean energy.
Greens will also prioritise investing in innovation to eliminate residual uses of fossil fuels in the economy, such as for HGVs and mobile machinery.
Powering up Fairer, Greener Energy Community Energy.
We are committed to the energy sector being under local democratic control as far as is possible. There is no reason why communities cannot be investors in everything from local area heat networks to offshore wind. Government will have failed if the infrastructure for sustainable energy generation is primarily in private hands.
We will push for: • A minimum threshold of community ownership in all sustainable energy infrastructure.
• The removal of regulatory barriers to community energy.
• Investment in community energy by regional investment banks.
A just transition to a zero-carbon economy Moving towards a green economy is inevitable if we want a liveable future. The big questions are: how smoothly we get there, how fast, who pays and who benefits? Greens are clear that the transition must benefit communities and not leave anyone stranded without jobs, as carbon- intensive industries shut down and we end fossil fuel extraction.
We need to learn the lessons of the 1980s when coal mining and other heavy industries were shut down. There needs to be a just transition, led by workers and unions, that sees communities reap the rewards of the shift to green energy. As part of this, we will push the next government to establish an Offshore Energy and Skills Passport so that workers can transition more easily between offshore energy industries.
Elected Greens will push for: • Investment in skills and training (including retrofitting) reaching £4bn per year, allowing workers to be prepared for the transition and the new roles they can take on.
• A minimum threshold of community ownership in all onshore sustainable energy infrastructure in the locality.
• A regional strategy building on industrial strengths across the country to maximise the contribution to the transition from existing jobs and businesses.
Sourcing renewable energy We are in the middle of an exciting revolution in the way we produce and use energy. Green MPs will aim to introduce new support and incentives to directly accelerate wind energy development, consulting with the sector on the best mechanisms, including increasing the maximum contracts for difference strike price so that it more accurately reflects supply chain costs and leads to the contracting of new capacity, and equipping ports and supply chains to better support floating offshore wind. This will pave the way for wind to provide around 70% of the UK’s electricity by 2030. Our targets are to achieve 80GW of offshore wind, 53 GW of onshore wind, and 100 GW of solar by 2035.
We would introduce new support for solar and other renewable energies, including marine, hydro-power and geothermal, to provide much of the remainder of the UK’s energy supply by 2030 and support the solar roof top revolution by mandating the use of solar panels on all new homes, where possible and appropriate. This will help generate the conditions for a regulatory sandbox, with the industry working alongside house builders to trial new innovations, and we will further incentivise the growth of solar and other renewables with mechanisms that could include installation grants and green mortgages, as well as reducing VAT.
Crucially, our approach will give the sector the confidence to invest and innovate that comes from long-term predictability.
We will end the de-facto ban on onshore wind.
This, along with transforming the planning system, would support a massive increase in wind power and other renewable generation, whilst balancing our energy needs with our priorities, protecting biodiversity and our food supply.
We will advocate for community renewables and champion the Local Electricity Bill to make it Creating A Fairer, Greener Economy easier and cheaper for local renewable projects to become suppliers to their local communities.
The Crown Estate will be brought into public ownership and should open more coastal waters for offshore wind and marine energy. Control over its assets within the jurisdiction of Wales should be devolved to the Welsh Government, as it is in Scotland. We will ensure that communities see the long-term profits from these vital energy assets.
Elected Greens will seek to properly regulate biofuels to end greenwashing and ensure they provide genuine net carbon savings. Only biofuels sustainably sourced within the UK will be permitted. We would end the practice of importing wood for burning at the Drax power station and end subsidies for biomass.
Distributing, sharing and storing energy.
To reduce our reliance on gas, we need to move renewable energy to where it is needed, and to invest in the capacity to store energy for when the wind is still, or it is cloudy.
Elected Greens will seek to significantly expand and improve the efficiency of the electricity grid, increasing its capacity so that it can distribute the increased electricity the UK will need as it transitions away from fossil fuels We support the extensive use of offshore power distribution networks to reduce the amount of onshore connection infrastructure needed along our coastlines, an approach being applied by our European neighbours.
We would connect our electricity supply more closely to that of our neighbours in Europe to provide a broader-based supply we can call on when needed and to allow us to export electricity when we have a surplus. We would rapidly expand the capacity for energy storage, so that there is security of electricity supply for short-term peaks in demand and periods of low supply from variable renewables.
We would support and rapidly increase the use of green hydrogen for necessary industrial use and energy storage technologies, seeking investment opportunities through academic-industry partnership.
We think there is value in a vaccine style task force approach to clean power and Greens will ensure priority is given to ongoing research into the best technologies and processes to address energy distribution, sharing and storing considering cost, timescale, governance and function.
Nuclear power.
We would cease development of new nuclear power stations, as nuclear energy is much more expensive and slower to develop than renewables.
We are clear that nuclear is a distraction from developing renewable energy and the risk to nuclear power stations from extreme climate events is rising fast.
Nuclear power stations carry an unacceptable risk for the communities living close to facilities and create unmanageable quantities of radioactive waste. They are also inextricably linked with the production of nuclear weapons. Green MPs will campaign to phase out existing nuclear power stations.
Our country is one of the richest in the world, yet millions of people are struggling to put food on the table and pay their bills.
The government has failed to invest in rapidly transitioning to a zero-carbon society, to create decent, secure jobs or to make our economy resilient to future climate shocks. It has put lifeline services for our communities at risk by more than a decade of savage funding cuts. It has let a small number of people hoard obscene wealth whilst our nurses are using food banks.
And shareholders have got ever richer while our privatised public services are run into the ground, sewage is dumped into our rivers and seas, and our trains don’t run on time.
We know that we can do better than this. With the right political choices, the UK can have a fairer and greener economy. An economy that delivers security, well-being and a better quality of life for everyone, as well protecting our environment and enabling us to tackle the climate crisis with the ambition and speed it demands.
Elected Greens would push for significant investment in a green economic transformation, alongside the private sector. This programme to include: • An average of £40bn per year over the course of the next parliament, including £7bn annually on climate adaptation.
• A carbon tax to make polluters pay and provide money to invest in the green transition.
• Bringing privatised utilities back into public hands.
• Taxing multi-millionaires and billionaires to fund our public services.
A Green Economic Transformation.
Our economy is on the brink of some really exciting changes. The green economy means cleaner, cheaper energy and millions of rewarding and well-paid jobs. But we can’t get there while we are also feeding money to the very sectors that are causing the climate and ecological emergencies, whether this is fossil fuels or new roads. And we won’t get there without a large- scale, long-term programme of investment. The Green Party is committed to investing in a green economic transformation.
We estimate that this green investment will require an average investment of £40bn per year over the course of the parliament to be spent as follows: Creating A Fairer, Greener Economy.
Powering up Fairer, Greener Energy.
Creating A Fairer, Greener Economy.
Electricity generation, transmission and storage £50bn.
Retrofitting buildings, installing non-fossil fuel heating systems, and adapting homes for a climate changed world £50bn.
Investing in a modern, electrified railway £30bn.
Public transport infrastructure £7bn.
Active travel £6bn.
Reducing the climate impact of road transport £4bn.
Reducing emissions from industry £11bn.
Water and sewage infrastructure £12bn.
Nationalisation of water companies and Big 5 retail energy companies £30bn.
Resource use.
Elected Greens will push forward the recommendations from the Climate Change Committee to reduce emissions of polluting fluorinated gases in all manufactured goods. We will also increase the scope of bans on the production of single-use plastics for use in packaging and disposable products such as baby wipes, as in many cases alternatives already exist.
Green MPs will increase investment into research and development by over £30bn across five years.
Bringing privatised utilities back into public ownership.
Privatisation has failed. Dividends are paid to shareholders while infrastructure is run into the ground. We need huge investment in our utilities and the government can borrow to invest much more cheaply – rather than these costs falling to bill-payers.
We commit to immediately bringing the railways, the water companies and the Big 5 retail energy companies back into public ownership.
Public investment would buy equity in these public utilities, ensuring they are run to serve us all, rather than to increase the wealth of shareholders.
