Everyone has the right to feel safe - on the street, in their home or online. Simple things like more police on the beat and greater support for domestic violence units can make a huge difference. But Greens recognise it’s time to do more - so we will tackle structural injustice and transform our policing and justice system.
Green MPs will expand restorative justice when crimes do take place, both to give victims a voice and to help offenders take responsibility for the harm they have done. We will focus on the prevention of crime through restoring the funding withdrawn from youth services since 2010 and through community-based policing. We will focus on rehabilitation through investment in the probation and prison services; Greens choose to rebuild people’s lives rather than condemning them to a downward cycle of crime and imprisonment.
It is a cliché that justice delayed is justice denied, but it is also true. We would invest in criminal justice so that defendants are brought to trial quickly in the interests of both victim and the people accused.
Elected Greens will work to: • Restore trust and confidence in the police.
• End violence against women and girls.
• Repair and renew our court system with a £2.5bn investment.
Trust and confidence in the police We believe in policing by consent, but this can only work if the police can rebuild trust with the communities they serve. Police Services need to acknowledge the institutional racism, misogyny, homophobia and disablism that have dominated policing for so long. They must root out any officers who hold views incompatible with serving as a police officer.
Many communities, especially Black communities, are disillusioned with the police after experiencing decades of disproportionate policing and traumatising tactics like stop and search and the use of force. Rebuilding trust and confidence and earning the consent of communities to being policed is critical for the future of policing.
Police Services should be accountable to elected local government and to the communities where they work.
Elected Greens will push for: • An end to the routine use of stop and search and to the use of facial recognition software.
• Police Services to deliver ongoing fitness to practice assessments on diversity for all police officers and relevant civilian staff.
• Police and Crime Commissioners, and local councillors on police and crime panels, to have open access to the data needed to enable effective scrutiny of operational policing.
Restorative justice and a practical approach to prosecution.
The Green approach to crime is grounded in a restorative approach and a belief that rehabilitation is the best way to reduce future offending.
Bringing Justice to Crime and Policing Prison is a demonstrably ineffective way of reducing reoffending: evidence shows that short prison sentences are especially ineffective and lead to higher rates of recidivism.
There are some people who need to be imprisoned for reasons of public safety or the seriousness of their offence. For others a restorative approach, forcing criminals to take responsibility for the consequences of their actions, is better for the offender, the victim and society at large.
Elected Greens will seek to break the cycle of reoffending through legislating for a presumption against custodial sentences under two years.
The Green Party welcomes the greater emphasis on diversion in the criminal justice system. Green MPs will ensure that diversion programmes are in place for: • All low-level drug and alcohol related offences.
• Young offenders arrested for low-level offences.
End domestic abuse and violence against women and girls The continuing murder, abuse, harassment and denigration of women and girls is a stain on our society. It is a Green Party priority to end domestic abuse and violence against women and girls.
Elected Greens will push to: • Make misogyny a hate crime across the UK and increase the police’s capacity to deal with domestic violence.
• Develop and implement a new UK-wide strategy to tackle gender-based violence, including domestic violence, rape and sexual abuse, Female Genital Mutilation (FGM), and trafficking.
• Ensure that domestic abuse and gender-based violence is a key measurable priority for all police forces and that all police officers are trained to recognise and tackle domestic violence.
• Fund local authorities so that domestic violence, rape crisis and other provision can meet local needs.
• Decriminalise sex work.
Tackling the court backlog The court system is in chaos and it’s letting down victims and the accused, whilst large numbers of prisoners on remand and endless court cancellations create knock-on effects for the prison and probation services too.
The Green Party will invest £11bn in restoring the Ministry of Justice budget over the course of the next parliament. This would be used to restore legal aid budgets, to ensure that the Criminal Bar is sufficiently well funded and to repair court buildings. Elected Greens will push to recruit more judges and to ensure that they are representative of wider society.
A public health approach to tackling violence.
Violence is experienced by communities across the country. The evidence supporting a public health approach to reducing violence is compelling. The Green Party supports the use of violence reduction units and the need for them to be a focus on multi-agency working.
In Scotland, the introduction of violence reduction units, coordinated with the Scottish Government’s control over public services, has delivered a welcome decrease in violence. Elected Greens will push for more local control over public services and more effective joined up working across public services to deliver violence reduction strategies.
Communities all over the country experience youth violence in particular. Many of the Green Party’s proposals will, over time, reduce the level of violence affecting young people.
Elected Greens will also campaign to ensure that: • Local authorities are properly funded to deliver youth services including the youth workers who play a key role in keeping young people safe.
• Safeguarding is the priority in encounters between young people and the police.
• The use of traumatising tactics like stop and search becomes an exception, not routine.
• Children and young people are never strip searched without an appropriate adult present, and only in very exceptional circumstances.
• Youth workers rather than police officers work with pupils in schools.
Reforming drug laws Elected Greens will push for the establishment of a National Commission to agree an evidence-based approach to reform of the UK’s counterproductive drug laws.
Neither prohibition nor the policing of low-level drug offences, especially cannabis possession, have reduced use and consequently have had no impact on the size of the criminal market or the profits made by organised crime.
Elected Greens will therefore push to decriminalise personal possession of drugs, diverting people from the criminal justice system towards support with addiction, housing and employment, from health workers focused on drug harm reduction This would free up hundreds of thousands of hours of police time, which could instead be invested in tackling other priorities which benefit wider society.
Tax avoidance.
We will clamp down on tax dodging. When companies and individuals fail to pay their fair share, it deprives our vital public services of much needed investment.
Greens support small businesses that are currently paying taxes for the services they use, and will take steps to tackle the global corporations that are not. It will be a priority to strengthen global tax agreements to stop corporate tax avoidance and evasion, and to ensure a level playing field between UK and transnational businesses. We will also ensure that HMRC has the resources it needs to reduce the gap between taxes due and taxes paid.
Bringing Nature Back to Life Public sector debt Choosing to trap us all in a self-imposed fiscal straitjacket is a false economy. It is clear that investing in protecting our climate now will save vast costs in the future. Investing in our public services and infrastructure is essential to a flourishing future for us all. As Greens we will never allow an obsession with fiscal rules to stop us investing in the public transport, schools and hospitals we all rely on – nor from taking the steps necessary to protect the climate for our children and their children.
Investing in the green economy of the future will be expensive – the Climate Change (CCC) Committee has estimated we will need an £50bn per year – but delaying action will be far more costly, both in human terms as the climate breaks down, and in terms of the damage to infrastructure caused by extreme weather events.
But the savings will be substantial too. The CCC estimates that by the end of this parliament this extra investment will be offset by reductions in day-to-day spending, including due to the extra efficiency of electric vehicles.
Greens will not allow our country to be held back by fiscal rules that don’t serve us all – we’re prepared to tax wealth and carbon emissions and prepared to borrow to invest in a fairer future. We do however acknowledge that public expenditure can only be expanded as far as the economy has the capacity to absorb it without triggering dangerous levels of inflation. This would be our overriding fiscal rule.
Our environment is our most precious resource; we depend on it for the air we breathe, the water we drink and the food we eat. We are one of the most nature-depleted countries in the world with about half of our nature lost.
Our commitment to nature is not based solely on the economic value it can provide; we are part of nature and unless it flourishes, we cannot flourish either.
Green MPs will aim to restore the health of soil and the purity of our water and protect pollinators like bees and other species that life depends on.
The experiment of water privatisation has been an unmitigated disaster, with routine discharges of filth into our water courses while the shareholders of water companies cream off profits from our ever-rising bills. Water is a public good which we would choose to return to public ownership, a move that would also enable the restoration of habitats and biodiversity.
Elected Greens will transform and reconnect us with nature by: • Introducing a new Rights of Nature Act giving legal personhood to nature.
• Set aside 30% of our land and seas by 2030 in which nature will receive the highest priority and protection.
• Taking the water companies back into public ownership.
Legal protection for the natural world.
Greens in parliament will make it a priority to pass a new Rights of Nature Act. For the first time, it would give Nature legal personhood, meaning that it could not be exploited for financial gain.
The Act would also set standards for soil quality and phasing out the most harmful pesticides immediately (including glyphosate) and, as we move towards regenerative farming methods, introduce rigorous tests for all pesticides. Only pesticides that pass this test, and demonstrably don’t harm bees, butterflies and other wildlife, would be approved for use in UK and we would end the emergency authorisation of bee-killing pesticides.
The Act will work in tandem with our commitment to a separate Climate and Nature Act. This will address the full extent of the climate and nature crisis in line with the most up-to-date science – and ensure a comprehensive and joined-up approach to the ecological emergency.
Elected Greens will also push for a Clean Air Act, which will set new air quality standards for the UK.
We would enshrine the right to breathe clean air in the law.
Elected Greens would seek to strengthen and prevent any rollback of existing protections of the Green Belt, National Landscapes and Sites of Special Scientific Interest Bringing Nature Back to Life.
A Fairer and Greener Approach to Public Finances Bringing Nature Back to Life Protecting Animals Safer waters for us all We are clear that the only way to end the scandal of our filthy water is to end the failed experiment with privatisation and bring the water companies back into public ownership. Money that is now being extracted by shareholders would be invested to fix the leaks and rebuild infrastructure.
Public water companies must also ensure that abstraction respects nature.
Elected Greens will push to restore rivers and take a nature-based solutions approach to the prevention of flooding and storm overflows.
We would increase DEFRA’s budget by £1.5bn, allowing an increase in funding for the Environment Agency and Natural England, to support the vital work they do to protect our environment. This would include developing a soil health monitoring programme for England, to match those in Scotland and Wales, to assess and understand changes in the health of soil over time. This would end the flow of pollution into rivers and the sea from fertilisers, agricultural waste and sewage, through effective monitoring and enforcement.
