Children’s social care.
The scandal of inadequate and under-funded care for looked-after children cannot be allowed to continue. Elected Greens will push for an additional £3bn to be provided to local authorities to enable them to provide high-quality children’s social care.
Elected Greens will also push for children in foster care or who have been adopted to have consistent access to a trained counsellor until it is no longer required. We would fund councils to extend staying put arrangements, so fostered young people can choose to stay with foster parents until they are 21.
There are over a million households on council waiting lists. In England you could expect to spend around 8.3 times annual average earnings to buy a home. Over 130,000 children are growing up in temporary accommodation. This national housing crisis is the result of 40 years of governments choosing to treat houses simply as assets rather than as homes, and of neglecting to build new social housing.
Building thousands of unaffordable homes isn’t the answer though – the priority should be providing everybody with a safe, warm affordable home. This means genuinely affordable homes, built to the right standards and in the right place, as part of flourishing communities. It means that we need to make sure all homes are fit for a climate-changed world. And it means protecting the rights of the millions of people who rent their homes.
Elected Greens will push to: • Provide 150,000 new social homes a year and end the so-called ‘right to buy’, so that these homes can belong to communities for ever.
• Empower local authorities to introduce rent controls.
• End no-fault evictions.
• Introduce a Fairer, Greener Homes Guarantee to ensure warm, safe homes that are well insulated.
• Transform the planning system so new developments come with access to public services and green spaces are protected.
Right Homes, Right Place, Right Price Charter Our Right Homes, Right Place, Right Price Charter will simultaneously protect valuable green space for communities, reduce climate emissions, tackle fuel poverty and provide genuinely affordable housing.
Councils and national governments should be working together to deliver the homes people need, where they need them and at rents and prices they can afford. Yet speculators and developers are currently allowed to chase the biggest profits and ignore local communities.
Greens will support local councils to provide good quality, affordable social housing in places where people live and work. And we will ensure large- scale developments are always supported by new infrastructure such as GP surgeries, bus services, cycling and walking networks, and extra places at nurseries and schools. All new developments should be accompanied by the extra investment needed to enhance local services too, and so that residents don’t have to rely on cars to live a full life.
We will transform the planning system to reduce the environmental impact of new construction and to require local authorities to spread small developments across their areas, where appropriate, rather than building huge new estates. Greens are also committed to protecting the Green Belt and ensuring everybody has easy access to a green space.
Elected Greens will campaign to change building regulations so all new homes meet Passivhaus or equivalent standards and to require house builders to include solar panels and low carbon Providing Fairer, Greener Homes for All Providing Fairer, Greener Homes for AllProviding Fairer, Greener Homes for All heating systems such as heat pumps for all new homes. We will upgrade the Minimum Energy Efficiency Standard to EPC C.
Our Fairer, Greener Homes Guarantee.
Most people’s energy bills are unnecessarily high because the UK has the worst insulated homes in Europe. By investing in energy efficiency to reduce the loss of heat, we can help everyone live in a warmer home and lower their bills: the cheapest bill is the one you don’t have to pay.
Elected Greens will invest: • £29bn over the next five years to insulate homes to EPC B standard or above, as part of a ten-year programme. £12bn of this will be to retrofit the social housing stock and £17bn as grants to retrofit privately owned homes to a similar standard.
• £4bn over the next five years to insulate other public buildings to a high standard. This is primarily for schools and hospitals, as part of a ten-year programme. £1bn will be made available as grants to retrofit private sector buildings to a similarly high standard.
• £9bn over the next five years for heating systems (e.g. heat pumps) for homes and other buildings.
• £7bn over the next five years to adapt homes to avoid over-heating in the hotter summers.
The Green Party will introduce a local-authority- led, street-by-street or area-based retrofit programme to insulate our homes, to provide non- fossil-fuel heat and start to adapt our buildings to the more extreme weather.
To achieve this, we will put in place the finance and foster the community buy-in needed for this national effort.
Financing our Fairer, Greener Homes Guarantee will come from common sense changes in each housing sector: Social housing: We want to see an end to competitive bidding for the social housing decarbonisation fund, so funding is there for all local authorities.
Owner occupiers: We will push for homeowners (freeholders and leaseholders) to more easily access property-linked finance to pay for the work needed on their property.
Private rental sector: We will push for tenants to have the right to insist that their landlords access property-linked finance on their behalf. Landlords will not need to provide any up-front finance, but they would have to repay the debt and will benefit from the improved value of the property. Rent controls would prevent them passing repayments straight on to tenants.
Social housing.
Our priority would be to increase Council and Housing Association provision of homes offered at low ‘social rents’ to 150,000 new homes a year, as soon as possible. We will end the ‘right to buy’ so that homes continue to belong to the communities who funded them and available to those who need a warm, secure home. Elected Greens will push for these new homes to be delivered through various measures, including new build and refurbishment.
There are estimated to be around a million empty homes across all tenures in the United Kingdom. We would empower local authorities to bring empty homes back into use.
The failure to maintain social housing properly is a national scandal.
Green MPs will push Ministers to ensure all social housing stock is brought up to and kept at a decent standard, with fair funding for Councils and Housing Associations to get this done.
Local authorities should be expected and funded to assess social housing needs, the availability and suitability of existing housing stock, and the sites suitable for new social housing.
We would ensure that the needs of the elderly, families with children, people living with a disability or requiring support through sheltered housing are adequately catered for.
A fair deal for renters.
Rent controls: Elected Greens will give the power to local authorities to control rents if the local rental market is overheated. Allowances would be made for maintenance.
A new stable rental tenancy and the ending of no-fault evictions: Elected Greens will push to end Section 21 no-fault evictions and introduce long- term leases. Private tenants need to be secure in their homes. Renters will also be given a new right to demand energy efficiency improvements.
Private Residential Tenancy Boards: Elected Greens will introduce Private Residential Tenancy Boards. These would provide an informal, cheap and speedy forum for resolving disputes before they reach a tribunal. Local authorities will be funded to meet a new statutory duty of tenancy relations.
Buy the supply.
Some local authorities have already been buying existing homes to increase their stock of social housing. This is currently being done on the open market with no enhanced leverage to reflect the wider social and economic benefits that can come from an increase in the supply of social housing.
Elected Greens will introduce legislation to give local authorities, registered social landlords and community housing groups the first option to buy certain properties at reasonable rates, for example private rental property that hasn’t been insulated to EPC rating C or that fails to meet the decent homes standard, or any property that is left empty for more than six months.
Planning.
Greens want communities to have the funding and the powers to make the planning decisions that are right for them. Local authorities need to be given the resources to act as guardians of the land and the built environment. They need to be able exercise a place-making and place-shaping role.
To enhance the role of local authorities, elected Greens will push for local decisions about planning to be informed by a land use planning policy framework that seeks to balance various needs, such as to meet the challenge of the climate emergency, protect nature, grow enough food, and provide homes and energy.
Each area’s local plan will set viability levels for development and there will be no subsequent negotiation with developers. And Greens will take back the power of building control from developers and invest in publicly accountable building inspectors and building control officers.
We cannot allow the continued provision of dangerous and substandard homes.
Minimising the climate impact of new homes and buildings Elected Greens will push for these steps to lower the carbon emissions from the built environment: • Demolition will require a full planning application or inclusion in a local development order.
• All new-built homes will be required to maximise the use of solar panels and heat pumps, or equivalent low carbon technologies.
• All planning applications will be required to include whole-life carbon and energy calculations, covering construction, maintenance and operational use.
• All materials from demolished buildings will need to be considered for reuse. Rates for disposal of builders’ waste will be increased to ensure that the economic driver for reuse is firmly in place.
• Building design needs to be future-proofed.
The government is still allowing homes to be built with obsolescent gas boilers and insufficient insulation. New builds and home renovations will meet the standards needed to mitigate climate change.
• New developments need to ensure that residents are not car dependent.
Powering up Fairer, Greener Energy Powering up Fairer, Greener Energy It’s a scandal that, in one of the richest countries in the world, millions of people cannot afford to heat their homes or cook a meal. This is because of political mismanagement and a failure to invest in reliable renewable energy or to upgrade the UK’s homes so that they’re comfortable and warm.
Elected Greens know we can ensure secure energy and affordable bills by moving over to a range of renewable energy technologies, from wind to solar. We will also make it easier for communities to have ownership of their energy supply.
Making our homes more energy efficient and changing how we travel is crucial to reducing the cost of energy for everyone.
In addition, Green MPs will push for: • Wind to provide around 70% of the UK’s electricity by 2030.
• No new oil and gas licences and the ending of all subsidies to the oil and gas industries.
• Communities to own their energy sources, ensuring they can use any profit from selling excess energy to reduce their bills or benefit their communities.