Financial services.
Financial services have a crucial part to play in achieving a rapid transition to a zero- carbon economy and ensuring that nature is protected. Green MPs would work to make this industry a force for good – directing finance towards the businesses that are critical to creating a better future for all.
Any company holding a UK banking licence will be required to present an investment strategy outlining a clear pathway to divestment of its current fossil fuel assets as soon as possible, and at least by 2030.
The Bank of England’s mandate will be changed so that funding the sustainability transition becomes a central objective, alongside the maintenance of price stability. The Bank would also be required to mainstream the climate crisis into its strategic thinking and to produce a carbon-neutrality roadmap for the financial system, including forward planning scenarios consistent with a 1.5 o C warming limit and the equity obligations of the Glasgow Accord.
The Bank of England should adopt a policy of credit guidance that will direct lending towards a just and urgent sustainability transition. There will be credit bans/ceilings for unsustainable activities. These targets will be mandatory for all banks relying on the central bank as a lender of last resort.
Non-bank financial institutions, such as UK pension funds, investment funds, mutual funds, brokers and insurance companies that sell policies in the UK, will need to remove fossil fuel assets from their investment portfolios, securities transactions and balance sheets by 2030.
The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) will develop targets to eliminate all equities relating to fossil fuel exploitation from the UK stock market and will immediately prohibit the issuing of any new shares for those purposes.
SME and community sector support.
Small and medium-sized business are the lifeblood of our economy and our communities.
We want to see them supported to play a key role in the green economy of the future, and to create new, quality jobs and training opportunities.
Green MPs will back the setting up of regional mutual banks to drive investment in decarbonisation and local economic sustainability by supporting investment in SMEs and community-owned enterprises and cooperatives.
These banks will be capitalised through a Co- operative Development Fund using some of the funds made available through the United Kingdom Infrastructure Bank (UKIB), along with an additional £10bn of public money. We will give local authorities £2bn per year to provide grants to help businesses decarbonise.
We will explore legal ways for companies to be transformed into mutual organisations, especially at the point of succession from one owner to another.
Community ownership can be encouraged through greater access to government funding in the transition to a zero-carbon economy.
We want to change markets where customers, suppliers and workers are open to exploitation through market dominance. We also want to ensure that structures exist in markets that allow for a competitively fair transition to a zero-carbon economy.
Late payment remains a problem for many businesses and sole traders. It is not acceptable that large companies or public bodies rely on unarranged credit from smaller enterprises to manage their cash flow or simply fail to process invoices promptly.
Elected Greens will campaign to bring the Prompt Payment Code into law and bar late payers from public-procurement contracts. We would mandate the Small Business Commissioner to investigate potential instances of poor payment proactively, instead of only when a complaint has been made.
Research, development and skills.
Green MPs will seek to increase investment into research and development by over £30bn in the lifetime of the five-year parliament. Additional spending will be primarily focused on tackling the climate and environmental crisis through funding research into sectors including: energy storage; agroecological agriculture and soil health; re-use, repair, recycling and designing out waste; carbon neutral construction; carbon-neutral production and carbon capture technology.
Elected Greens will push the UK government to partner with universities, other research institutions and business to assess the most economically and environmentally significant areas for research and development. International collaboration and supporting the research efforts of the Global South will be important aspects of international solidarity.
Respecting the limits of the planet.
Despite the other political parties continuing to argue that endless economic growth is the solution to all our problems, there is a growing consensus it is actively undermining our wellbeing. We can no longer continue to exploit oil, gas, forests and oceans for economic growth – their overuse is already threatening our future survival, as well as the future of our economy and society.
Green MPs will change the way success is measured in our economy, with new indicators that take account of the wellbeing of people and planet and that track our progress towards building a greener – and fairer – future.
Creating A Fairer, Greener Economy.
Making Work Fair/ Central to achieving an economy that sits comfortably within planetary boundaries will be more domestic production of a much wider range of goods and services. Increased self-sufficiency builds resilience, both nationally and within communities, as well as strengthening local economies.
Green MPs will advocate for a circular economy that reduces the waste of resources. We will require manufacturers to offer ten-year warranties on white goods, to encourage repair and reuse. We will introduce a comprehensive ‘right to repair’, so manufacturers keep goods operational years after purchase and to eliminate built-in obsolescence. We will require manufacturers to produce only the most energy efficient white goods, TVs, lighting and electric cookers. We will encourage a shift from an ownership to a usership model, for instance through car-sharing platforms and neighbourhood libraries for tools and equipment.
Elected Greens will campaign to amend the Companies Act 2006 so that company directors must prioritise the well-being of all living entities (including all nations, all species and future generations, as well as all people alive today) and avoid negative environmental and social consequences.
The Green Party believes that workers’ and trade union rights need to be restored after decades of decline under successive governments. Too many people are being exploited and underpaid, with too little protection from the law.
This outgoing government has dedicated itself to attacking the democratic right of workers to organise to defend themselves, while simultaneously failing to negotiate fair pay and conditions in the public sector. The Green Party believes trade unions are a vital partner in building a fairer, greener economy.
Elected Greens would campaign to: • Repeal current anti-union legislation and replace this with a positive Charter of Workers’ Rights.
• Introduce a maximum 10:1 pay ratios for all private and public-sector organisations.
• Deliver equal rights for all workers currently excluded from protections, including ‘gig economy’ workers and those on ‘zero hours’ contracts.
All workers should be able to choose to organise with their colleagues to improve their conditions, get the pay they deserve, and withdraw their labour if necessary: we would restore legal protection for these basic rights. Elected Greens will campaign to repeal current anti-union legislation introduced since 1979 and replace it with a comprehensive Charter of Workers’ Rights.
We will restore the right to strike, remove arbitrary ballot thresholds and outdated requirements for postal ballots for strike action, and overturn bans on secondary picketing and industrial action for political objectives.
Wages and working conditions Decades of Conservative, Labour and Coalition rule have created a poverty economy, with stagnant wages and millions earning less than a living wage. We will seek to introduce a minimum wage of £15 an hour for all, no matter your age, with the costs to small businesses offset by increasing the Employment Allowance to £10,000.
The ever-expanding gap between companies’ highest earners and their lowest paid is damaging for our society, so Green MPs will campaign for a maximum 10:1 pay ratio for all private and public-sector organisations. No worker should see their CEO getting paid more in a day than they do in an entire year.
We will legislate for workers to have full employment rights from day one of their employment. We will properly fund the enforcement of workers’ rights and abolish tribunal fees, to ensure that bad employers have nowhere to hide. We will require all large and medium-size companies to carry out equal pay audits and redress any inequality uncovered both in terms of equal pay for equal work, and unfair recruitment and retention practices. And we will campaign for safe sick pay, because it’s good for workers, good for employers and good for public health.
Making Work Fair.
‘Gig economy’ workers – like those working for Uber and Deliveroo – are excluded from fundamental workers’ rights. Every worker deserves equal protection. We will bring platform workers under a single legal status of ‘worker’, with full and equal rights from the first day of employment. Every worker will have a right to access their data and to appeal management decisions. Gig employers that repeatedly breach data protection, employment or tax law will be denied licences to operate.
Green MPs will push for pay-gap protections to be extended to all protected characteristics including ethnicity, disability and sexual orientation. We believe in equal pay for equal work and in the right to flexible working arrangements that will benefit women, carers and disabled people in particular.
Reducing working time can make us all happier, healthier and more productive. Elected Greens will support reduced working hours and moving towards a four-day working week.
Most of us want to live in a country where everyone is treated with dignity - not one in which record numbers of children are in poverty, older people can’t keep warm or disabled people are being badly let down. A combination of austerity, poor choices in response to the Covid pandemic and the ongoing cost-of-living crisis has left too many people reliant on foodbanks and going hungry. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation estimate that 3.8 million people experienced destitution in 2022, including one million children.
With the right political choices, we can do so much better – lifting everyone up and making sure all of us can access extra help if we need it.
Elected Greens will campaign to: • Increase Universal Credit and legacy benefits by £40 a week.
• End the unfair five-week wait for benefits which is pushing people into debt.
• Abolish the two-child benefit cap and lift 250,000 children out of poverty.
• Increase all disability benefits by 5%.
• Ensure that pensions are always uprated in line with inflation and keep pace with wage rises across the economy.
• Increase carer’s allowance by at least 10% a month.
• Scrap the bedroom tax.
In the long term, Green MPs will push for the introduction of a Universal Basic Income that will give everybody the security to start a business, study, train or just live their life in dignity. This major change to our tax and social security system is the work of more than one parliament.
In the meantime, we will end benefit sanctions and challenge the punitive approach to welfare claimants, instead recognising that that all of us might need extra support or a safety net at different points in our lives. Elected Greens will take every opportunity to advocate for the most disadvantaged in society.
Throughout this Manifesto there are further measures aimed at helping people struggling with the cost of living including free home insulation, subsidised public transport, and investment in the public services.
Giving Everyone a Fairer, Greener Deal.
A Fairer and Greener Approach to Public Finances.
Our country is crying out for investment. Too few buses in rural areas, crumbling flood defences and the high cost of our energy bills are all consequences of the government choosing not to invest. And when small businesses lose workers to long hospital waiting lists or when children need time off school because of asthma caused by air pollution, it’s clear the price of this failure is high.
We can make different choices though, by taxing wealth fairly and by taxing pollution to generate enough money to rescue our public services and in protecting our climate.
Green MPs will take a positive approach to public investment by: • Taxing wealth fairly and taxing investment income at the same rate as earned income.
• Committing to no increases in the basic rate of income tax during this cost-of-living crisis.
• Borrowing to invest and rejecting the self-imposed straitjacket of conventional fiscal rules.
Taxing wealth fairly In 2020 the wealthiest 10% of households held 43% of all the wealth in Great Britain. Greens think a fairer future for us all means tackling this imbalance and the damage it’s doing to our economy and the planet. Wealth held in assets doesn’t circulate, so its benefits aren’t shared, whilst lifestyles that consume vast amounts of energy contribute disproportionately to the climate crisis.
Rather than taxing wealth fairly, the other political parties are refusing to rule out further cuts and are instead bending to pressure from excessively high earners, the City and the newspaper barons – all at the expense of the future of the country.
We don’t think that’s fair, and neither do the 64% of people who support maintaining or increasing taxes rather than cutting public services.
Elected Greens will push for a wealth tax. This will tax the wealth of individual taxpayers with assets above £10 million at 1% and assets above £1bn at 2% annually. Only a very small minority of people would be subject to the wealth tax, while the overwhelming majority would benefit.
Elected Greens will push too for the reform Capital Gains Tax (CGT) by aligning the rates paid by taxpayers on income and taxable gains.
This would affect less than 2% of all income-tax payers.
Elected Greens will also call for the reform of tax rates on investment income, by aligning them with the tax and NIC rates on employment income.
Ensuring that all income is taxed at the same rates irrespective of source is both fair and works to avoid tax avoidance by the unscrupulous.
We would remove the Upper Earnings Limit that restricts the amount of National Insurance paid by high earners. Tax rates should not fall as income increases.
We would equate the rate of pension tax relief with the basic rate of income tax to help fund the social care that will allow elderly and disabled people on low incomes to live in dignity.
We would reform inheritance tax, ensuring that intergenerational transfers of wealth are taxed more fairly.
The tax reforms set out above are designed to simplify and align the rates of tax paid on income and investment gains, whatever their source, and to introduce a wealth tax on very high concentrations of wealth. Without access to the full modelling capability available to the Treasury we can only estimate the additional revenue that would be raised from our proposals. Overall, we estimate that by the end of the next parliament they could add raise between £50 and £70bn per year in 2024 prices. To put this into perspective, our reforms would increase direct tax raised from individual taxpayers from 19% of GDP to 21%. And because of the approach we have adopted, this would fall on those most able to pay.
Property taxes.
The UK has one of the most concentrated land ownership systems in the world: half of England is owned by less than 1% of the population, although we have no proper information on who owns vast swathes of the land that is our most valuable resource.
The Green Party has always opposed the Council Tax, which is a regressive tax, that shifts the emphasis away from a local tax on property. As part of shifting taxation away from employment and towards wealth, elected Greens will champion a fair system for taxing landowners. Our long-term policy aim is a Land Value Tax so that those with the most valuable and largest land holdings would contribute the most.
In the next parliament, elected Greens will take steps towards this by pushing for: • Re-evaluation of Council Tax bands to reflect big changes in value since 1990s.
• Removal of business rate relief on Enterprise Zones, Freeports, petrol stations and most empty properties.
• A survey of all landholdings to pave the way for fair taxation of land.
Business taxes Green MPs will support an increase in the rate of the windfall tax on oil and gas production and the closing of existing loopholes and tax-relief mechanisms. We would introduce a windfall tax on banks when excessive profits are being made.
We would also propose a range of changes to VAT, reducing it on hard-pressed areas such as hospitality and the arts and increasing it on financial services and private education.
These changes would raise up to an additional £40bn in business taxes during the five years of the next parliament.
Carbon Tax.
Elected Greens will advocate for a carbon tax to incentivise businesses to decarbonise their supply chains and to help raise the money needed to shift to a zero-carbon economy. There will be an alignment of all existing taxes on fossil fuels and carbon emissions to aid compliance.
Elected Greens will propose levying a carbon tax at an initial rate of £120 per tonne, rising to a maximum of £500 per tonne of carbon emitted within ten years. This is deliberately designed to make it cheaper for the emitter to take steps to reduce emissions rather than pay the tax.
We estimate we will be raising up to an additional £80bn by the end of the parliament, then falling back after that as carbon emissions reduce across the economy.
