MAKING NORTHERN IRELAND WORK.
 VOTE FOR CHANGE. VOTE ULSTER UNIONIST.
 A Message From Doug Beattie MC Ulster Unionist Party Leader.
Elections are about people and none are more important than a General Election. On the 4th July ordinary people will make an extraordinary decision as they decide who they believe is best placed to represent them over the next 5 years.
As the leader of the Ulster Unionist Party, I am acutely aware that we have not had a presence on the green bench of Westminster for a number of years. Northern Ireland’s representation has been poorer for not having Ulster Unionist MPs making the case for Northern Ireland and our place within the United Kingdom. Our aim, this election, is to change that with your help ensuring we have an effective and visible pro-Union voice at Westminster.
Throughout this manifesto it will refer to people, place, prosperity, public services and peace. It is the 5Ps that underpins delivery; focusing on our economy in order to make Northern Ireland work for all.
 The Ulster Unionist Party wants to see change in Northern Ireland. We want to see our economy grow through Foreign Direct Investment, by utilising and promoting Small, Medium and Micro enterprises, by promoting a skills agenda and an entrepreneur mentality amongst our wealth generators. We want to see stability and continuity of devolved government that is accountable and transparent adding value to daily life in Northern Ireland.
This manifesto is for you, and it is you who has the ability to create real change in Northern Ireland. It is now down to you, you have one vote, on one day with one chance to deliver change.
If you want change, vote for change, vote for the Ulster Unionist Party on 4th July and create the future we all want for our children.
 THE UNION.
The Ulster Unionist Party stands firm in our commitment to safeguarding Northern Ireland's integral position within the United Kingdom. During this potentially significant General Election, we wish to underscore the profound importance of the Union, historically and in the present day and continue to fight for its preservation.
Northern Ireland's bond with the United Kingdom is rooted deeply in history, going back for centuries. It is a testament to our shared values, culture, and identity that it has endured through many trials and triumphs. The Union has provided stability, security and a framework for progress, enabling Northern Ireland to thrive within the broader British family.
The practical benefits of Northern Ireland's Union with the rest of Great Britain are multifaceted and encompass all aspects of life.
The United Kingdom offers Northern Ireland unparalleled economic advantages. It allows for trade with the rest of the UK and provides access to global markets through the UK's extensive network of trade agreements. This strengthens Northern Ireland's economy, creates jobs, and stimulates innovation, ensuring a brighter future for generations to come.
One of the most cherished benefits of the Union is access to the National Health Service (NHS). The NHS delivers universal healthcare, providing high- quality medical services to all regardless of their means, free at the point of use, giving us access to hospitals, GPs surgeries and prescription medicines, ensuring our families’ health and well-being are safeguarded.
The UK’s Armed Forces, where the people of Northern Ireland are over-represented by share of population, guarantees the defence and security of Northern Ireland. In an increasingly dangerous world, His Majesty’s Armed Forces and military provides protection from external threats and upholds the rule of law, fostering a safe environment for us all to live, work, and prosper. Ulster Unionists are grateful for the protection our Armed Forces provide the United Kingdom and will be steadfast in our support for service personnel, veterans and their families across the United Kingdom.
The Ulster Unionist Party is seeking to secure seats in the Westminster Parliament to champion Northern Ireland's concerns and aspirations. We will actively engage in parliamentary debates, committees, and legislation, advocating for policies that benefit Northern Ireland and uphold its position within the United Kingdom.
“Beyond the House of Commons, we will work diligently to engage with the UK government, Whitehall departments, and policymakers in London. We will strive to ensure that Northern Ireland's interests are at the forefront of decision-making processes, influencing policies that impact our economy, society, and security.”  WINDSOR FRAMEWORK.
The Ulster Unionist Party is committed to defending and promoting Northern Ireland's place within the United Kingdom. During this General Election, we reaffirm our dedication to upholding the principles of the Union and ensuring that the interests of Northern Ireland are safeguarded at all levels of government.
The Windsor Framework represents a stepping-stone in addressing the challenges posed by the Northern Ireland Protocol, a protocol that we have campaigned against since it was forced upon Northern Ireland. While the UUP acknowledges the progress made through negotiations, we remain vigilant in scrutinising the outworking of the Framework, and future negotiations between Westminster and the EU, to ensure that Northern Ireland's place within the UK internal market is fully restored.
We recognise the complexities and nuances of the Windsor Framework and acknowledge that further reforms will be necessary to address constantly developing concerns. The UUP will actively engage in democratic scrutiny processes, both within the Northern Ireland Assembly and other relevant bodies, to challenge aspects of the Framework that undermine Northern Ireland's sovereignty and economic prosperity.
The recent resumption of the Northern Ireland Assembly is a positive step towards restoring effective governance and representation for the people of Northern Ireland. The UUP is fully engaged in the Assembly's role in scrutinising legislation, holding the Executive to account, and representing the diverse interests of the people of Northern Ireland.
Using our representation on the Windsor Framework Democratic Scrutiny Committee of the Northern Ireland Assembly, the Ulster Unionist Party have already highlighted genuine concerns that this mechanism is already not fit for purpose. The ability to effectively assess legislation and policies emanating from the EU that might impact Northern Ireland's position within the UK is greatly reduced by the inability of the Scrutiny Committee to act in a collegiate manner. We will work with a new government at Westminster to challenge any attempts to erode Northern Ireland's sovereignty or undermine the integrity of the Union and will campaign to have the existing scrutiny processes reviewed and replaced with structures that guarantee that safeguard.
 GOVERNANCE.
OPPORTUNITIES.
CHALLENGE.
In Westminster, the UUP will utilise any seats gained in the 2024 General Election to represent Northern Ireland's interests forcefully and effectively. We will advocate for policies that promote economic growth, protect our healthcare system, and ensure Northern Ireland's voice is heard in national debates while also challenging, the out workings of the Windsor Framework that cause further divergence between GB and Northern Ireland.
Through active engagement in democratic processes, robust scrutiny of legislation, and effective representation in Westminster, we will ensure that Northern Ireland's interests are protected and advanced. With a steadfast commitment to the principles of the Union, the UUP will strive to secure a prosperous and secure future for all the people of Northern Ireland within the broader British family.
The Ulster Unionist Party is dedicated to defending and promoting Northern Ireland's place within the Union with the rest of Great Britain.
EMBRACING.
LEADING.
PROVIDING.