JUSTICE & LEGACY.
Policing and Justice were devolved to Northern Ireland in 2010.
From that moment it has been mismanaged, poorly resourced and badly understood. Instead of building on the resilience and commitment of a workforce and structures that were able to operate in the most difficult of circumstances and environment at pace, Northern Ireland moved to a system that gutted our Policing and Justice structures.
Our Courts are struggling to keep up with demand and our Prison Service have been left feeling demoralised and marginalised. None feel valued, none feel in control, all feel that they are working in a reactive atmosphere instead of a proactive forward leaning sector.
The confidence in the Northern Ireland justice system is at an all-time low where many believe sentencing structures are broken and in need of a complete overall. Victims and Witnesses of crime are seldom informed of the progress of their case and are further marginalised by not being informed when a prisoner is being released.
The Ulster Unionist Party will, at Westminster and in Stormont, work to ensure our Policing and Justice system are fit for purpose.
Police first approach - Ulster Unionists are steadfast in our support for delivering a headcount of 7,500 officers proposed by the Independent Commission for Policing in Northern Ireland over twenty years ago (“A New Beginning: Policing in Northern Ireland” September 1999). We believe that 500 additional police officers should be recruited over the next 3 years, in addition to the normal recruitment to replenish leavers.
OUR COMMITMENTS: Attestation - Police Officers should attest at the start of their training making them a legally appointed police officer from their first day, in line with other forces around the United Kingdom. This will also allow for quicker pay transition to a higher band on completion of training and after probationary periods.
Speeding Up Justice – Justice in Northern Ireland takes twice as long as similar through our courts than in the rest of the United Kingdom. This has a detrimental effect on Victims and Witnesses. Even when stronger sentences are available, courts all too often impose sentences at the lower end of the scale.
This has led to a lack of confidence in our justice system. The public is also left frustrated at the ease with which bail is granted and the number of defendants with multiple convictions who regard prison as an occupational inconvenience. Deterrence seems an alien concept to our system. Ulster Unionists will press for stronger sentences particularly for habitual, violent re-offenders and work to speed up the administration of justice and the time between arrest and sentencing.
 Sentence Credit –It is not acceptable that a perpetrator can put his victim through the trauma of a trial and on the last day admit guilt and as a consequence receive a reduced sentence. The Ulster Unionist Party will propose that this and similar practices must be stopped. This will mean longer time spent behind bars for the perpetrator and shorter licence periods. Ulster Unionists will campaign for a review of the near mandatory practice of giving serious offenders a 50/50 custodial sentence allowing for only half of the sentence to be served.
Stand By Victims - All too often victims have been regarded as an afterthought by our justice system, as the focus turns to the ‘rights’ of the victim makers. Victims need to see a change in culture within the justice system whereby the State is seen to be fulfilling its duty of protecting law abiding citizens. The police solve crimes, courts hand out meaningful sentences and victims are given the support they need.
Witnesses of crime are all but forgotten as our justice system creaks and slows to a near standstill. It is important that witnesses are kept engaged at every level to ensure continuity of evidence to maximise positive outcomes.
Reduce Legal Aid costs and Lawfare - the legal aid bill in Northern Ireland is out of all proportion to the size of this Province costing over £90m a year according to the latest available figures. In spite of efforts to reduce the size of the bill, it is proving difficult to achieve a successful resolution. The situation is not helped by the culture of lawfare which has been allowed to develop within our legal system and which has proved extremely lucrative for a number of firms.
More progress must be made to reduce the legal aid bill and a league table for those legal firms that benefit most from the legal aid system must be published. Ulster Unionists have previously called for a comprehensive review of legal aid in Northern Ireland to forensically address the issue of a legal that is by far the most generous in the whole of the UK. All options for reform should be on the table, including capping the legal aid bill and capping what solicitors can charge for certain cases.
Challenge Serious and Organised crime - far too many communities across Northern Ireland are plagued by organised criminal gangs which are involved in serious criminal activity including drug dealing. Some are regarded as paramilitary or terrorist in nature, claiming a spurious political motivation in a bid to gain some kind of legitimacy, whilst others are simply the type of organised criminal enterprises that exist in major cities in the Republic and in Great Britain.
Over 25 years on from the Belfast Agreement, it is incomprehensible that so-called paramilitary gangs are still in existence. These groups need to be put out of business permanently. Ulster Unionists want to see a concerted effort against the leadership of such groups with a focus on arrests and seizure of assets to reassure the public that crime really does not pay.
Resource Prisons - the loss of personal liberty is the ultimate sanction available to the UK State for those who have broken the law and who have damaged society. Whilst rehabilitation is important where possible, we must also be mindful of the need to punish, protect society, and deter others. Ulster Unionists want to see our Prison Service given the resources they need - including a workforce that is fit for purpose with the correct numbers, terms and conditions.
It is important that we reduce the number who are held on remand in prison by finding alternative methods to deal with those bound over. Speeding up justice which will naturally reduce those on bail as they are dealt with in the court and methods such as electronic tagging must be introduced, as it is in England.
 Dealing with legacy has been something th Ulster Unionists will engage positively with and Information Recovery (ICRIR) but rema (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act which denie perpetrators.
The Ulster Unionist Party is also opposed to any return to the Stormont House Agreement Legacy proposals as they contain elements that both deny justice and deter truth and reconciliation.
The funding and expansion of the PSNI Legacy Investigation Branch to deal with all troubles related crime including murder, attempted murder, sexual crimes and assaults such as ‘tarring and feathering’.
This LIB should be enhanced by an increase in qualified homicide investigators, funded from Westminster from a multi-year budget, under the command of a Deputy Chief Constable (Legacy) answerable to the Chief Constable and with normal oversight mechanisms.
WE SUPPORT: LEGACY.
Dealing with legacy has been something that has plagued Northern Ireland for many years. Ulster Unionists will engage positively with the Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery (ICRIR) but remain opposed to the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act which denies justice for victims and gives amnesty to perpetrators.
The Public Prosecution Service should be split into two sections with one section looking at normal workload and the second dealing purely with legacy issues. The legacy section should be funded by Westminster from an agreed multi- year budget.
The LIB and PPS (Legacy) would work within Northern Ireland and engage with other jurisdictions to investigate all troubles related crimes when information ensuring for everyone is given the opportunity for justice and accountability.
