HEALTH.
Whilst we are incredibly fortunate to have a system free at the point of delivery – just as the NHS was originally envisaged - no one can pretend our system is functioning as it should. Waiting times remain wholly unacceptable, demand is outstripping capacity and challenges remain on the recruitment and retention of sufficient HSC workers.
Just like in January 2020, earlier this year the Ulster Unionist Party took the courageous decision to return to the Department of Health. We didn’t need to, there were several other much less challenging Department’s still available, however we stuck to our longstanding commitment that the health and wellbeing of the people of Northern Ireland was our number one priority. Despite being the only single-Minister Party within the Executive, we again demonstrated a genuine obligation by returning to what is undoubtedly the most difficult job in the Northern Ireland Executive.
 As the newly appointed Minister of Health, Robin Swann demonstrated leadership by immediately bringing stability to a service that had been left reeling after a further period of political abandonment.
And from May this year our Minister Mike Nesbitt has been effectively leading a system that is facing some of its most unprecedented challenges. The greatest of which is the devastating financial implications of the 2024/25 Budget allocation.
We had hoped that unanimous political commitments made prior to the restoration of the Executive, that health would be the number one priority, would be honoured. But that hasn’t been the case.
Instead of investing in our health service, the 2024/25 Budget is delivering a record £184m cut in funding. Even after some incredibly difficult savings this year will be implemented – as we remain committed to delivering – the reality is there is a shortfall in the budget.
Whilst that remaining shortfall could be eliminated by taking drastic action by making thousands of health workers redundant, closing the equivalent of a large 500 bed hospital, and by ceasing almost 1million hours of domiciliary care, the Ulster Unionist Party will not do that. Our health service has suffered enough from repeated political abandonment, and we will not allow it to be abandoned on this occasion. Making those catastrophic impact spending cuts such as these at this time would undoubtedly inflict unprecedented levels of suffering, and so we will simply not allow patients to come to further avoidable harm.
To deliver the intended benefits for our patients and wider system, our health service must be supported by sustainable multi-year investment.
Yet despite the profound budget uncertainty, opportunities do remain. The momentum for transformation of service delivery has continued, especially in areas such as elective and digital transformation.
Whilst many waiting times remain intolerable, for the first-time tangible improvements can start to be seen across many specialities. There has been a noticeable reduction in treatment waiting times, with particular improvements in the number of patients waiting for inpatient/day case surgery for General Surgery (-21%), Trauma and Orthopaedic surgery (-8%), ENT (-16%), Gynaecology (-22%), Urology (-10%).
The Ulster Unionist Party’s focus will remain on driving through improvements in service delivery wherever and whenever possible. That will include a renewed focus on improved productivity and efficiency to fully maximise capacity using existing resources.
 OUR COMMITMENTS: We will continue to transform services to allow us to meet the needs of the population going forward. This will include the identification of the next Elective Overnight Stay Centre as well as further commissioned activity in Day Procedure Centres, and the continued expansion and utilisation of mega-clinics. This will be assisted by the publication of a HSC reconfiguration blueprint, the publication of a multi-year plan, as well as through the ongoing implementation of the elective care framework, the mental health strategy, and the cancer strategy.
In addition, Mike Nesbitt has brought about a renewed determination to drive improvements in population health and to address health inequalities. A new targeted and innovative health inequalities initiative will be announced in the autumn.
Central to our healthcare system are its dedicated staff. Prior to the pandemic, systemic staffing issues persisted, resulting and a grossly undervalued healthcare workforce. We commit to our long-standing policy of maintaining pay parity, and will continue to engage with Executive colleagues in order to ensure independent pay recommendations are funded and delivered as quickly as possible.
 In the meantime, we will continue to accelerate the progress and savings already being delivered by reducing the most expensive forms of agency staff, by now also introducing a new framework to limit hugely expensive off-contract medical and locum costs. This will follow the success already made in banning off-contract nursing. In parallel we will stabilise Trust non-clinical banks, and place greater emphasis and instil learnings from exit surveys to address staff turnover.
Primary care serves as the health service's front door, handling over 90% of all contacts.
Recognising its pivotal role, the Ulster Unionist Party will continue to empower primary care to deliver a broader range of services, including elective services, and commit to the further rollout of the MDT programme.
“We will remain steadfast in investment and strengthening our social care system. In order to deliver long-term sustainability of the sector it’s important that we see wages climb well beyond the lowest levels. The Ulster Unionist Party will drive through the work of the Fair Work Forum and it’s work on developing proposals to improve terms and conditions and career prospects for social care staff.” A FAIRER SOCIETY.
 The Ulster Unionist Party is committed to supporting gender equality. We will work to remove barriers to women's participation in employment by providing accessible, affordable childcare and access to education, training, and transport.
We support flexible working and parental leave for both parents and making progress towards gender-responsive budgeting, providing financial guidance and support as women approach retirement age, and ensuring that legislation tackling violence against women and girls is robust and responsive to developing challenges. We will maintain momentum in IVF treatment availability and ensuring Northern Ireland plays a leading role in the UK Menopause Taskforce to improve care and support for women experiencing menopause. We will also promote the widely accepted definition of a woman as an adult female and protect women’s spaces, sport and the language used to describe women.
The Ulster Unionist Party believes in equality for the LGBTQ community. We support banning the practice of conversion therapy, introduce a policy of zero new HIV diagnoses by 2030, provide fertility services accessible to all without discrimination, ensure equal access to adoption and fostering and implement a zero-tolerance approach to hate crimes and harassment.
Ulster Unionist Party MPs will press the next UK government to prioritise addressing poverty and its devastating effects in their policymaking. This must include the abolition of the Universal Credit two- child limit.
Unpaid carers save the public purse nearly £6 billion in Northern Ireland every year and make an invaluable contribution to our Health and Social Care system. To better protect their health and wellbeing and ensure they have access to adequate breaks, there should be a renewed focus on providing adequate respite services.
The Carer’s Allowance benefit isn’t fit for purpose and is leaving many unpaid carers struggling to make ends meet. The Department for Work and Pensions should increase the value of Carer’s Allowance to properly reflect carers’ living costs. It should also increase the Carer’s Allowance earnings cap so that more unpaid carers can stay in the labour market while keeping their payments.
The Ulster Unionist Party is committed to building a fair and united society within the United Kingdom Across the UK, around 16 million people have a recognised disability, which constitutes about 24% of the total population. This includes 11% of children, 23% of working-age adults, and 45% of pension-age adults (Disability, accessibility and blue badge statistics, England, 2022 to 2023 - GOV—UK; Disability facts and figures | Disability charity Scope UK.) In Northern Ireland, approximately 21% of the population reported having a disability according to the most recent surveys, a figure that mirrors trends across other regions of the UK, indicating a rise in the proportion of people living with disabilities.
DISABILITIES OUR COMMITMENTS: Ulster Unionist Party MPs will advocate for the next Government to not only acknowledge the high proportion of the population living with disabilities but also to proactively develop policy interventions that improve services and the overall quality of life for these citizens.
We firmly believe that the most effective way to develop these policies is by ensuring that individuals with lived experience are not just included, but are at the forefront of creating these policy interventions. Their unique perspectives and challenges are invaluable in shaping policies that truly meet their needs.
Additionally, your Ulster Unionist Party MPs will work to hold the next Government to account if they fail in their duty to support our citizens living with disabilities in having active and fulfilling lives.
This support must include recognising that Personal Independence Payment and other social security payments are crucial in this regard, and any attempt to scale back this support will have a far-reaching and devastating impact.
We will advocate for the next Government to acknowledge the high proportion of the population living with disabilities and to proactively develop policy interventions that improve services and the overall quality of life for these citizens. This will include pressing for the incorporation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities into UK law, ensuring that the rights of individuals with disabilities are fully protected and promoted.
“These statistics emphasise the significant portion of the population living with a disability, highlighting the crucial need for policies and initiatives aimed at enhancing their quality of life.”