IMMIGRATION.
Controlled Immigration is important to all countries across the world. In the UK it has helped create a skilled workforce. Many doctors, nurses and other Health Care professionals come from other countries around the world, setting up home in Northern Ireland and contributing to our society in a positive way. Northern Ireland is also heavily reliant on ethnic minorities from other countries to carry out highly intensive manual jobs within the agri-food industry.
For those who wish to make Northern Ireland their home and contribute we must do all we can to make them welcome. We must support them as they integrate into our society through our education and health systems and absorb our values of tolerance, hard work and civic responsibility, adding value to who we are.
Those asylum seekers who come here fleeing persecution from places like Afghanistan, Syria, Ukraine and Hong Kong should also be welcome and their applications dealt with at speed and with diligence to ensure all is correct. It is especially important that families with young children or single mothers are processed swiftly.
Illegal immigration undermines our systems, creates a burden on public services and prevents genuine asylum seekers being deal with in a timely manner.
The market in people trafficking and illegal immigration has now become big business. It is cruel and exploitative, and must be challenged and brought to a halt.
Our immigration system must be open, transparent and fair. We must target the traffickers, who put people’s lives at risk for profit, as our main defence in reducing illegal immigration.
WE WILL: Have a zero-tolerance policy on illegal immigration, while being responsive to genuine asylum seekers.
Support government measures to target the people traffickers through cooperation with other European countries.
Increase the number of staff working on asylum applications threefold to allow genuine asylum seekers to receive their application decision quicker and when granted asylum to integrate fully into UK society.
Fast track asylum application for families with children, single mothers or those who have a protected professions such as doctors or pharmacists.
Northern Ireland has moved away from the old binary labelling of Orange and Green. We are now a multi- cultural society with a variety of ethnic minorities who call this place home while they continue to celebrate their culture through music, dance, the written word, religion and food. It has created a diversity in Northern Ireland that is enriching, welcoming and positive.
There are a minority of people in Northern Ireland that feel threatened by multi-cultural diversity and are intimidating those from differing ethnic backgrounds resulting in some newcomers feeling isolated and scared. This is totally unacceptable. The Ulster Unionist Party will work across civic society and support the police to end this unacceptable behaviour.
WE WILL: Continue to support a Racial Equality Strategy for Northern Ireland.
Promote a multi-cultural society that ensures ethnic minorities have the opportunity to integrate throughout Northern Ireland.
Ensure funding for ethic minority and religious groups, including cultural events, is fair and proportionate building on the Belfast Mela celebrations as best practice.
“Immigration has created a diversity in Northern Ireland that is enriching, welcoming and positive.” Support the Police Service of Northern Ireland and civic society to address and end race related intimidation and discrimination.
Support people from minority ethnic backgrounds who fully contribute to our society, through education, the economy, health services, community activities, sports and the arts.
