SDLP MANIFESTO WESTMINSTER 2024.
 An Election for Change.
Leader’s Message.
This election is about change.
It is the clearest opportunity we have had in more than a decade to put an end to the politics of austerity, isolation and division that have driven governments for 14 brutal years.
It is a chance for Northern Ireland not just to send a message against failed policies of austerity and ever-hardening Tory nationalism, but to send MPs that will use their voice and their influence to fight for all the people of this region.
A Change Election.
For months now, SDLP representatives have been speaking to people from every background and in every community across the North.
We have heard first-hand accounts from people who’ve been forced to take out credit union loans to pay for private healthcare, from nurses and junior doctors, running themselves into the ground to make sure that the people in their care get the best possible outcomes, to young people who can’t afford to buy their first home, pensioners struggling to keep the heat on (even in June) and others lucky enough to get on the property ladder who are at their wit’s end because they can’t keep up with sky high mortgage prices.
How could you not be frustrated with the way things are? After 14 years of brutal Tory governments, public services are on life support, our health service has already started to collapse, wages have stagnated and costs are through the roof. And in the middle of it all, the two local parties charged with leading devolved Government at Stormont both decided to tear it down for years at a time, leaving us unprotected from unfiltered Tory austerity.
It doesn’t have to be like this.
Using our voice.
Almost five years ago people from every community came together to cast their votes for change. After two years where the only voices from here at Westminster were the DUP, who used that power to cause chaos, voters came out in huge numbers and decided to use their voice. In an election where we were all told that we couldn’t make a difference, people decided to choose change. They sent more than just a message - they sent hardworking SDLP MPs who have fought for them, their family and our communities every single day.
And we have delivered.
We’ve secured almost £100m for university expansion in the North West.
We delivered a step change in investment from the Irish Government through the Shared Island Unit worth more than £1bn for projects like Narrow Water Bridge, the A5, Casement Park and far more.
 We’ve brought new regeneration funds to redevelop and enhance town and city centres and we’ve seen investment in addiction services to help the most vulnerable people and families who need our help.
We’ve done all that, and more, with a Tory government - imagine what we could do with a Labour government that understands this place and listens to the views of our MPs.
SDLP MPs are best placed to deliver change because we will have the strongest relationship with a new government. Other parties have done deals with the Tories in their own self-interest or won’t bother turning up to make a difference. By contrast, SDLP MPs will be there where it counts and when it counts to deliver for everyone in our communities.
Raise your voice.
SDLP MPs have made sure that our voice - and your voice - is heard. On the issues that matter to people - standing up for our health service, demanding oil and gas companies pay higher taxes on their profits to support people struggling with the cost of living, fighting for investment in public services, jobs and skills - we have been loud and clear.
And on burning international issues - we have been the most vocal champions for peace. Claire Hanna and I have been the strongest opponents of the blank cheque written by the British Prime Minister and the American President for the onslaught against the Palestinian people.
We have spoken hard truths to our political rivals and our allies when they’ve got this wrong.
And while others enjoyed parties in the White House, we stood in solidarity with people here who have always supported peace and an end to the genocide.
In Stormont, people are already seeing the impact that our constructive SDLP Opposition voice is having: holding the Executive to account on moving beyond rhetoric towards delivery of a plan to rescue public services.
That’s what you get with SDLP MPs - representatives who stand their ground, stick to their principles and fight for you, whatever the political weather.
A chance for change.
After more than a decade of austerity, isolation, division and deadlock we have a chance for change. It is a chance for a new start for all of us.
On 4th July, take that chance. Vote SDLP.
Colum Eastwood SDLP Leader.   Our Priorities for Change.
A New Start - Remove this Tory Government from power.
Better Public Services for All – reduce hospital waiting lists with additional investment in health Improved Funding Model for NI.
Repeal the Legacy Act.
A Fairer Economy for All.
Recognise the State of Palestine and end arms exports to Israel.
Restore nature and support a just transition.
 A NEW START.
Fourteen years of Conservative government have been a disaster for people and communities in Northern Ireland.
Austerity has brought public services to the point of collapse. Cuts to social security have left vulnerable people and working families struggling to make ends meet. A pathological obsession with leaving the European Union has severed our links to one of the world’s largest markets leaving people, community groups and businesses far worse off. And a government run by liars, cheats and con men has left confidence in public life shattered.
This election is the clearest opportunity we have had in more than a decade to remove the Tories from power and to make sure that what comes next is genuinely a new start for all of us.
SDLP MPs will use our voice and our influence at Westminster. Our voice has always been influential and, though we aspire to a different constitutional future, we have always used our platform at Westminster to maximum effect. As a member of the Party of European Socialists, we have strong relationships with our counterparts in the Labour Party which we will use to positive effect for all the people of the North – but we retain our own identity and will also be unafraid to hold a new Government robustly to account when necessary.
Our Westminster team will complement the vital work of the SDLP Opposition team at Stormont in delivering a step-change in accountability and delivery.
While most areas of policy and public service delivery are devolved to the Northern Ireland Executive, vital power remain with Westminster including the most fundamental power: the purse strings. We are also alive to the instability of the devolved institutions and the significant periods of collapse at the hands of the parties which are supposed to lead the Executive.
This manifesto sets out our ambition and our priorities for change using the power that people invest in us by taking our seats to make a difference.
SDLP MPs will Use our votes to ensure there is no Conservative Government; Use our voice with a new government to establish immediate priorities for investment in public services in Northern Ireland; Work with other parties to secure a strong fiscal framework for Northern Ireland; Seek reform of the devolved institutions to prevent the veto of government and decline in public services; Prioritise the repeal of the Legacy Act and deliver justice for victims and survivors.
