Working alongside the SDLP Opposition at Stormont, SDLP MPs will: 
1. Support ambitious climate legislation in Westminster SDLP MPs will always support ambitious climate legislation at Westminster. In the last mandate, we supported the Climate & Nature Bill aimed at rapidly reducing greenhouse gas emissions, reversing biodiversity loss and building consensus for a just transition. We will also support a ‘Well-being of Future Generations Bill’ to This would be aimed at improving the social, economic, environmental and cultural well-being of people here.
2. Campaign for an independent Environmental Protection Agency An Independent Environmental Protection Agency must be established as recommended by the Review of Environmental Governance in 2007 and agreed by all parties in the New Decade New Approach agreement in 2020. The SDLP also secured support in the Assembly on 13th May 2024 for the establishment of an independent environmental protection agency by the end of this Assembly mandate.
 Addressing the Climate Emergency and Biodiversity Crisis.
Dealing with the threat of unchecked global temperature increases, climate breakdown and the biodiversity crisis is an urgent necessity. The failure to take the threat posed by the climate crisis is a generational injustice that will fundamentally change the society that our children and grandchildren inherit.
Colum Eastwood tabled pioneering climate legislation in the last Westminster mandate that would have introduced tougher net zero commitments and created a new green jobs levy to force the biggest corporations to contribute to climate mitigation and a just transition to a low carbon economy.
SDLP MPs also co-sponsored the Climate & Nature Bill in Westminster. This will mandate UK Government to achieve climate and nature targets, put in place a strategy to achieve those targets and establish a ‘Climate and Nature Assembly’. Claire Hanna was also the deputy chair of the All-party group on Climate Change.
 3. Prioritise Water Quality None of our rivers, lakes, transitional & coastal water bodies currently meet overall good status when ecological and chemical status are considered. The SDLP will insist that a newly established Independent Environmental Protection Agency prioritises improvement in the status of our rivers, lakes, transitional & coastal water bodies.
4. Fight for a Lough Neagh Recovery Plan A properly funded plan of action must be brought forward to address the ecological crisis in lough Neagh. Steps must be taken to upgrade the Wastewater Treatment Works around Lough Neagh, introduce unannounced sampling of water, enforce existing regulation on pollution with fines when necessary, and increase inspections of farms.
5. Campaign for a ‘Just Transition’ A key objective for the SDLP was that the Climate Change Act enshrined the principles of a Just Transition.
However, progress has stalled on this vital aspect of the fight against climate change.
A Just Transition Fund for Agriculture has still to be set up to provide incentives and advice to the agricultural sector to help it deliver its contribution and a Just Transition Commission is still to be established, which to support all sectors of our economy in meeting the targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
The SDLP will continue to hold government at Stormont and Westminster responsible for the delivery of a Just Transition, including ensuring that it is a central tenet of all climate action plans by Executive Departments 6. Fight for Sustainable Funding for Farming The UK’s departure from the European Union led to the end of EU funding for farming through the Common Agricultural Policy.
The SDLP will work to ensure that new funding streams properly support farmers and are used to encourage the development of environmentally sustainable farming methods that encourages and supports biodiversity across the industry..
7. Seek to implement an all-island animal cruelty register The SDLP supports the introduction of an all-island animal cruelty register to prevent known animal abusers from buying or owning animals in another part of the island.
SDLP MPs will continue to lobby the next government on this issue in order to end the scandal of animal abuse across these islands.
8. Support new legislation on clean air Poor air quality contributes to 800 deaths in Northern Ireland every year. SDLP MPs will support an ambitious new Clean Air Act with clear goals to reduce particulate matter to 10 micrograms per cubic metre as soon as possible but no later than 2030 with stretch targets for further reduction in PM2.5 levels.
SDLP MPs will support the inclusion of clean air filtration guidance for the public sector to include health, education and other settings.
SDLP MPs will also advocate a joint work stream as part of the British-Irish Council on clean air frameworks given that this policy area is is a supra-territorial issue.
