Investing in our Education System Our education system similarly requires urgent investment and reform in order to guarantee all of our young people the best possible start in life.
The SDLP was vocal throughout the Independent Review of Education and we have expressed our concerns that without significant additional resources, the review will end up being a paper exercise.
 Working alongside the SDLP Opposition at Stormont, SDLP MPs will: Fair pay for teachers and school staff - The SDLP believes that teachers have not been appreciated by successive Education Ministers. We argue that there should be an increase in pay above inflation for teachers and school-based support staff.
Support for the Irish Language Sector - The SDLP strongly supports the Irish language sector, including ensuring that Irish-medium education is fully supported.
Action to tackle Educational Underachievement - We will continue to fight for proper resourcing for the delivery of plans to address educational underachievement and the implementation of the report A Fair Start.
The transformation of Special Educational Needs provision - The SDLP recognises the SEN system needs a complete overhaul. We need to build a system that supports these children and their families, including reforming post-19 Special Educational Needs provision. We made comprehensive submissions to the consultations in relation to SEN Regulations, the Code of Practice and Area Planning and our three-point plan to improve SEN provision includes a streamlined assessment process, an increase in staff to process applications and a Children’s champion to act as an advocate on behalf of parents and children.
A cap on school uniform costs - We support action to cap costs for families alongside an expansion of eligibility for financial support for students.
Action on restraint and seclusion - Statutory guidance and appropriate training for school staff and governors about the use of restrictive practices in an educational setting.
Progress on integrated education - The SDLP has a long history of supporting integrated education, both in our words and deeds. The SDLP Opposition has led the way in opposing the decision to remove £150 million of ringfenced funding by the Executive and UK Government and continue to campaign against it. We supported the recent Integrated Education Act and will continue to promote integrated education, including holding the Executive accountable for the implementation of that legislation.
A Review of the Education Authority - The SDLP is unconvinced that the Education Authority is fit for purpose. We would support a review of the Authority remit and structures.
