Justice, Equality & Rights.
 Justice, Legacy and Victims.
1. Legacy The SDLP will always stand with victims and for truth, justice and accountability. Over recent years, justice has been severely undermined by the UK government at Westminster through the corrosive impact of the toxic Legacy Act, which the SDLP opposed at every turn. This abhorrent amnesty was an act of serious bad faith that has breached obligations undertaken in all-party agreements and the international treaty further to “ the Stormont House Agreement”.
The SDLP has consistently maintained that we must address the past in a comprehensive and ethical way that fully supports the needs of victims in a way that upholds the highest standards of human rights. This would be one of the single greatest contributions to reconciliation and healing.
We have an over-riding priority: In Westminster, the SDLP successfully lobbied the UK Labour Party to commit to repeal the Legacy Act in the next Parliament, SDLP MPs will hold the Labour Party to account on that commitment if elected.
2. Systemic Reforms The SDLP supports substantive reforms to the criminal justice system to deliver faster, fairer justice with increased accountability.
Working alongside the SDLP Opposition at Stormont, SDLP MPs will: Change the focus to rehabilitation.
While in some instance progress has been made in the management of prisons, we believe that further structural and staff reforms of the prison service are needed in order to enhance rehabilitation as well as the safety and dignity of both prison staff and prisoners.
The SDLP continues to call for a progressive approach including support for community mediation methods and non-court approaches of dispute resolution. We support the establishment of a 12-month post-release supervision programme following international best practice models in order to help reduce re-offending.
Systemic reforms must be introduced to protect the rights of victims We support the introduction of an effective communication strategy to raise awareness of the Victim and Witnesses Charters and how information that signposts services, support providers and entitlements to services can easily be accessed.
We support the full implementation of the remaining recommendations from the HIA Inquiry and the release of redress payments and other required support to survivors.
3. Policing The SDLP will always lobby for a visible police presence in our communities, which has been hollowed out by a decade of Tory austerity. This requires a gear change in policing with the community and ensuring that no community is managed by “gatekeepers” who exercise undue influence in local areas.
Working alongside the SDLP Opposition at Stormont, SDLP MPs will: Ensure the PSNI must be representative of the community it seeks to serve We will continue to challenge the PSNI on the recruitment, retention and promotion policies especially with regard to underrepresented groups. The SDLP continues to believe that the recruitment, retention and promotion of officers and civilian staff from the Catholic tradition is a pressing challenge for the PSNI and requires the deployment of every measure including affirmative action.
Combating Cybercrime, economic crime & fraud Every aspect of our lives from the NHS, transport systems to communication networks is vulnerable to increased cybercrime, economic crime and fraud. The SDLP will continue to work with all relevant authorities, including the PSNI’s Chief Constable and the Northern Ireland Policing Board to ensure that a modern, technology advanced police service is equipped with the capacity and skills to combat online crime.
4. Tackling Paramilitarism We must end paramilitarism and associated criminality in our society once and for all. We have consistently called for the escalation of the law enforcement approach to seek out and close down all involved in paramilitary criminality and the addressing of the legacy of historic assets.
Working alongside the SDLP Opposition at Stormont, SDLP MPs will: We will ensure that the Paramilitary Disbandment Strategy Panel is provided with the support and information it may require from organisations including the PSNI, An Garda Síochána and other stakeholders Greater cooperation between the PSNI and An Garda Síochána to deal with crime associated with the border The SDLP fought hard for local oversight and robust accountability protections for the National Crime Agency. We are now calling for stronger collaboration between all relevant agencies to deliver a specific anti-corruption strategy for Northern Ireland and a significant uplift in resources.
There should be a dedicated NI assets recovery and enforcement organisation  5. Ending Violence Against Women and Girls At all levels of government, the SDLP has relentlessly campaigned for the new Ending Violence Against Women and Girls Strategy to be fully implemented and funded. In the past, SDLP MPs supported the successful Istanbul Convention Bill on preventing and combatting domestic violence against women and girls.
Working alongside the SDLP Opposition at Stormont, SDLP MPs will: Lobby the Executive Office repeatedly to reverse the indefensible cut to Women’s Aid The current cuts leave Women’s Aid NI as the only part of Women’s Aid across the UK without state funding. This is totally indefensible and must be reversed by the Executive as a matter of urgency.
Hold the Department of Justice responsible on its policy and legislation In the last mandate, new legislation was introduced on a range of areas including domestic abuse and stalking. However, there has been very limited provision for the implementation, training or monitoring of these new offences. Moreover, not all recommendations from the Gillen Review have yet been implemented.
Review the Family Courts System The SDLP also believes that a review of the family courts system is required, as has been undertaken in England, and will work constructively with the Department and relevant authorities to ensure that a review is delivered urgently.
