A Fairer Economy For All.
A Fair & Prosperous Economy.
The SDLP advocates a strong, prosperous and balanced economy, with opportunities for all our citizens, regardless of background. Northern Ireland’s economy has, however, been held back for far too long by a scarcity of ambition in our government, the chronic under-funding of the region and the refusal of the Northern Ireland Executive to take the steps that are required to drive wealth creation, expand opportunity, develop skills and end the brain drain once and for all.
We will work to build a prosperous, world-leading and regionally equitable economy that works for everyone no matter background, circumstance or geography.
SDLP MPs will work to: 1. Maximise the Opportunities of Dual-Market Access The SDLP has long advocated the huge competitive advantages offered by the Protocol/ Windsor Framework, which places Northern Ireland uniquely at the crossroads of two of the world’s most important markets.
The SDLP supports the creation of a strategy that is tailored to the sectors that have most to gain from the Protocol/Windsor Framework and which is co-developed with buy-in and funding from both the Irish and British governments and the European Union. We have pressed for a step-change in cooperation between Invest NI and IDA Ireland. This investment strategy should be complemented by the creation of a new ‘European Investment Hub’ for Northern Ireland. The SDLP believes that a strong all-island economy benefits all the people of this island and creates new opportunities for NI business to trade on an all-island basis. To this end, we will also campaign to increase InterTrade Ireland funding.
2. Rebalance our economy for broad-based growth The SDLP led the campaign for reform of Invest Northern Ireland and helped to secure the damning Lyons Review which found the need for “profound change” in the organisation, including on a sub-regional basis. The SDLP will hold the Economy Minister accountable for the implementation of the findings of the review of Invest NI, including the publication of a meaningful Sub-Regional Economic Action Plan, the objectives of which should relate to all government Departments.
We are also seeking to introduce binding obligations on all government departments in law, ensuring that each government department is measuring the effect of its policies, strategies and plans on regional balance and implementing changes so everyone can have a fair start in life. The SDLP will seek the devolution of the ‘levelling-up’ agenda to Northern Ireland with commensurate funding and appropriate governance arrangements to rebalance the oversight of the agenda and decentralise its management.
3. Tackling poverty Poverty is a moral outrage and social ill that should be ended once and for all. The actions of the Conservative government over the last decade and a half have pushed struggling individuals and their families over the poverty line and into abject crisis. SDLP representatives opposed the decision to hand over welfare powers to the British government. We have seen the consequences of that decision play out in communities across Northern Ireland in recent years.
SDLP MPs, in conjunction with the SDLP Opposition at Stormont, will work with representatives at all levels of the Party to lobby for the publication and funding of a robust and cross-cutting Anti-Poverty Strategy. The SDLP placed poverty at the top of the agenda at Stormont by devoting an entire Opposition Day to the subject, including pushing for the Executive to use the revenue raised from this year’s regional rate increase to pay for ending the pernicious two-child limit.
The next UK government must also ensure an Essentials Guarantee within Universal Credit, ensuring that the basic rate at least covers life’s essentials and that support can never be pulled below that level.
The SDLP will also hold the Minister for Communities responsible for the failure to build the appropriate level of housing, including social homes. The costs of rent and mortgages have forced more and more people into poverty in recent years and although housing is a devolved matter, SDLP MPs will fight to ensure that the appropriate funding is made available to the Northern Ireland Executive to address the housing crisis.
We have also voted for pension justice for WASPI women and sought to protect women here in Northern Ireland. In the next parliament, the SDLP will seek to reverse this punitive decision, reduce the State Pension Age and protect pensioners who have suffered as a result of this policy.
The SDLP also supports the exploration of pilot schemes of Universal Basic Income, particularly in areas of highest disadvantage.
4. Support our Tourism and Hospitality Sectors Tourism is a key sector of our economy and has gone from strength to strength since our peace agreement. It is a critical driver of economic development that is now worth more than one billion pounds every single year in Northern Ireland.
The SDLP will work to secure an ambitious and fully funded Tourism Strategy that supports our tourism operators. We will also work with the NI Executive and Irish government to ensure the Strategy extends the Wild Atlantic Way into the North along with the inclusion of Counties Armagh and Down in Ireland’s Ancient East as well as the inclusion of Fermanagh and Tyrone into Ireland’s ‘Hidden Heartlands’ programme.
 5. Invest in Our Arts and Culture The arts and culture are integral to a thriving economy, as well as enhancing the social wellbeing of all the people who live here, promoting community integration and helping to tackle social isolation. Arts and culture should not only be viewed as extracurricular pursuits, but as an industry which contributes tens of millions to our economy each year and deserve more investment, not less, with workers who are properly remunerated and supported.
Despite our strength in this industry, arts and culture in Northern Ireland is underfunded, with arts spending per head dramatically lower than any other part of these islands. We support a meaningful increase to arts funding to catch up with the other jurisdictions on these islands the delivery of a new Arts, Culture and Heritage Strategy without delay.
SDLP MPS will also specifically lobby the Westminster government to provide additional funding to the Executive in order for the Arts Council NI to provide Artsmark accreditation in Northern Ireland.
6. State of Financial Services The SDLP will push for a Westminster inquiry into the state of financial services in NI, including the cost of insurance, consumer & business banking, branch closures and cross- border challenges.
7. Backing Our Small Businesses Small businesses are the backbone of our economy. The SDLP wants to make sure that we provide support to our small business sector, start-ups and entrepreneurs.
SDLP MPs will: Continue to support the automatic uprating of the Employment Allowance in line with any increases to the National Living Wage, to continue to support small business employers as wages increase Work to increase the VAT threshold to £100,000 Ensure that both Whitehall and devolved government departments and public agencies commit to and implement prompt payments for small businesses.
Commit to reduce the use of unnecessary personal guarantees in small business lending, recognising the chilling effect the overuse of personal guarantees has on small business willingness to invest A reduction in the use of unnecessary personal guarantees in small business lending Establish a ‘Banking Hub Setup Fund’, funded by the high street banks, to assist in covering the purchase and setup costs of banking hubs on high streets or in town centres Ensuring that the business support provided by the UK Shared Prosperity Fund matches, or exceeds, those funds previously received under European Structural and Investment (ESI) funding, and that the UK keeps pace with similar EU funding schemes.
 Investing in Skills.
Investing in Skills.
Skills are the engine of our economy, but far too many people and places have been left behind by the failure of government policy here to properly invest in those skills and create a pipeline from cradle to grave. The current approach must be transformed to create pathways to skills at all levels and in all places.
The SDLP is committed to defending education at all levels as a public good and fully supports properly funding higher and further education to expand opportunity for all people, regardless of backgrounds. Using the power of our seats at Westminster, the SDLP has secured funding for the expansion of Magee and the development of the Medical School in the North West.
SDLP MPs will continue to prioritize investment in skills and opportunities. Working alongside the SDLP Opposition at Stormont, SDLP MPs will fight for: 1. A full-size university campus at Magee of at least 10,000 students Achieving a full-size university in Derry is a critical lever to drive economic development in the region and ensuring an equitable distribution of student numbers across the North-West is critical to generating sustainable and broad-based economic development.
Our record is clear. The SDLP successfully lobbied for the establishment of the Graduate Entry Medical School. Colum Eastwood secured the target of 10,000 students in the New Decade, New Approach agreement. We also secured millions of pounds of investment from the Irish government through the Shared Island Unit and have relentlessly pushed the government to finally deliver. We support an ambitious plan to reach at least 10,000 student places at Magee, as a minimum, along with comprehensive measures to ensure Derry can be supported to become a leading university city on this island. We also support specific financial incentives for students to study at the university campus at Magee. In line with the recommendations of the Royal Irish Academy, we support the establishment of a cross-border oversight body for higher education in the North West.
 2. A Review of Higher Education funding The previous Economy Minister announced a review of higher education funding, including on student fees and the appropriate level of teaching grant to higher education institutions. The current Economy Minister has rolled back on this commitment. The SDLP supports a fundamental review, including to ensure the appropriate mix of teaching and research funding for university as well as financial support for students. The review, and its implementation, must ensure that no student is disadvantaged because of costs, including at postgraduate level.
3. Lifting the Maximum Student Numbers cap in Northern Ireland MaSN places a cap on our ambition and is a disproportionate barrier to expanding skills development across the North. The SDLP has opposed an arbitrary cap on student numbers and will fight to raise our ambition to provide opportunities in every community.
4. A New Approach to Further & Higher Education We support a new approach to third level education that creates a skills pipeline from schools to colleges and universities, ends the cluttered landscape of skills provision through proper funding for the Skills Strategy and ensures parity of esteem between the further and higher education sectors. Further education colleges must be supported in tandem with universities to ensure a coherent skills ecosystem and the Department for the Economy must progress the reform of Further Education delivery.
5. Properly funding apprenticeships and reforming the Apprenticeship Levy The SDLP is committed to properly funding apprenticeships, including through working closely with the private sector to expand the number of Higher-Level Apprenticeships, particularly in places of disadvantage and ensure that appropriate support is in place for businesses in order to take on apprentices. We will ensure that employers in Northern Ireland are no longer expected to contribute to the fund without being able to draw from it.
The SDLP has also consistently supported pay parity for FE lecturers and will fight to ensure that their needs are treated as equal with their counterparts in schools.
6. Legislation for a Lifelong Learning Guarantee We will fight to ensure age is never a barrier to learning.
 Defending Workers’ Rights.
Defending workers’ rights will always be central to the growing of a strong economy and the SDLP has stood resolutely shoulder to shoulder with workers in their demands for fair pay throughout the cost-of-living crisis.
Public sector workers have been taken for granted for far too long and it is appalling that so many of the workers who keep our society running have been allowed to fall further and further behind their counterparts in Britain. While the government was quick to applaud workers during the pandemic, it has shown no such urgency in ensuring the same workers receive the fair pay and treatment that they deserve.
In the Assembly, SDLP MLAs are holding the Economy Minister accountable on worker’s rights and demanding a comprehensive and ambitious Employment Bill. In Westminster, SDLP MPs have consistently stood up to the worst impulses of the Tory government. We were the only Northern Ireland party in Westminster to support a ban on the practice of firing and rehiring workers.
SDLP MPs will: 1. Fight for a New Deal for Working People The SDLP supports an end to zero hour contracts and will continue to campaign for an equal minimum wage to prevent discrimination against young people in pay. We also support ensuring that flexible working is a day one right and believe that we must ensure the rights of workers in Northern Ireland should not be allowed to fall behind those in other parts of these islands. The SDLP also supports expanding trade union rights including reducing the minimum number of employees needed to from a trade union branch.
2. Seek an economy that works for everyone The SDLP believes in breaking down every barrier to participation in the economy. We must, therefore, ensure the implementation of legislation on gender pay gap reporting.
In addition, we support reform of the full rate equivalent maternity leave which is currently one of the lowest across OECD countries and believe the real Living Wage should be used as a baseline for Statutory Maternity Pay from weeks 7-52, as well as reforms to Universal Credit regulations to ensure maternity allowance is treated as earnings rather than unearned income.
3. Support our Unpaid Carers We support the introduction of at least five days of paid carers’ leave. Unpaid carers throughout our society have borne the brunt of government neglect and policy failure, with many forced into poverty while undertaking this vital role. There is a particular gendered impact of this government failure, as 60% of unpaid carers are women.
Without the unpaid carers that look after their loved ones each and every day, our health and social care system would simply collapse.
SDLP MPs will also support foster carers receiving the same employment status as other workers. Rather than being forced to register as self-employed, foster carers who provide an important service, should expect to receive the same entitlements as other care givers.
