Building For Our Future - Infrastructure.
To build a prosperous, sustainable future in NI, we need to urgently invest in our infrastructure.
The SDLP has been at the forefront of campaigning for more ambitious infrastructure plans to stimulate economic growth, improve people’s quality of life & safety and ensure a sustainable future for all.
Working alongside the SDLP Opposition at Stormont, SDLP MPs will: 1. Seek investment in public transport Investing in our public transport network is a crucial lever to help combat the climate emergency and create sustainable communities across the North. We have a strong record of investment in public transport, including introducing the first fleet of zero-emission buses in Derry. Improving accessible transport, ensuring that public transportation infrastructure, including buses, trains, and stations, is physically accessible to individuals with mobility impairments, such as wheelchair users and those with limited mobility. We will seek to promote coordination and integration between different modes of transport to improve reliability and specifically, addressing the dearth of night-time provision which will be key in assisting economic growth.
2. Fight for A5 Delivery The delivery of the A5 is long overdue. We will fight to ensure that funding invested by the Irish government is backed up with allocations from the British government.
3. Advocate for A6 Completion The A6 is a critical infrastructure project and when completed will be an economic driver of opportunity across the region. This is particularly important given the additional plans for housing developments. We will work with DAERA to secure a remediation plan at Mobuoy in order to help address this environmental crime and progress the completion of the A6.
We will also fight to secure funding allocation to complete Phase 2 Drumahoe to Caw as soon as possible. In addition, the SDLP will continue to raise safety concerns & signalisation of Caw Roundabout and advocate for the front-loading of these essential works.
 4. Deliver on the potential of all-island rail The SDLP delivered the first All Island strategic Rail Review in a generation. We will now push for progress on delivery. We will seek an update on the Phase 3 of Derry to Coleraine Feasibility Study and ensure Derry has fair, accessible rail provision to include hourly Sunday services and stops at Derry City Airport, Strathfoyle and Ballykelly.
5. Prioritise Our Water Infrastructure & Flood Alleviation We require adequate investment to upgrade water infrastructure to prevent risk of overspill and pollution into the environment. The system is simply not fit for purpose and cannot meet the new environmental standards or public demand. The SDLP are opposed to water charges and prevented their introduction in government.
We are deeply concerned that the construction of 19,000 homes across NI is currently at risk due to lack of water/sewerage infrastructure. This has led to an investment backlog that has placed a stranglehold on the economy, building of homes, tourism, threatening ecosystems and water quality and preventing investment opportunities.
We recognise the dire position of NI Water and urgent need to address a legacy of underfunding. However, further hardship cannot be heaped on families struggling to make ends meet. The Executive must prioritise investment in critical infrastructure through means other than domestic charging.
Moreover, 45,000 properties in Northern Ireland are at risk of flooding. The consequences of climate change will increase that figure significantly in the time ahead. Many people know all too well the devastation wrought to homes and businesses as a result of flooding. The Executive has failed to get a handle on the situation, leaving Northern Ireland far behind UK and South of Ireland counterparts in terms of flood forecasting. By improving warning systems, we can ensure communities are better prepared for flooding events.
6. Progress Electric Vehicle Infrastructure In government, the SDLP established the Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Taskforce. In order to grow our EV network and ensure that these vehicles are an option for all people, the EV Infrastructure Action Plan being developed by the Taskforce must be delivered. This Action Plan must also ensure equitable access within the network.
7. Reform the Planning System Planning for the future of NI, provision to prioritise and expedite large-scale housing developments and climate change adaptation/ projects/ local development plans. The SDLP will seek to streamline the planning process and address current backlogs. We want to ensure there is alignment on planning policies with broader economic, social, and environmental objectives to promote balanced and inclusive & sustainable development.
