WORKING AND
WINNING FOR YOU
SPEAKING UP FOR
NORTHERN
IRELAND
GENERAL ELECTION MANIFESTO
JUNE 2024
MANIFESTO
2024
Making
NI Work

MANIFESTO

On 4th July voters will face a
clear choice at this General
Election.
Do they want to elect those who will go to
our national Parliament and unashamedly
make the case for Northern Ireland within
the Union, wanting to promote it and do
the best for it or will they be represented
by people who won’t go or who will spend
their time talking Northern Ireland down?
The Democratic Unionist Party has an
experienced track record of speaking up
for you on issues that matter. While others
talk about delivery, we can stand over
what has been achieved. The DUP has the
strength and depth to be able to make the
Pro-Union case and to unashamedly make
the case for Northern Ireland in Parliament.
For Northern Ireland to truly flourish, it
needs the United Kingdom to succeed
and likewise for the UK to truly flourish it
needs all its constituent parts and regions
to succeed.
This requires a strong DUP team in
Westminster who will take their seats on
the opposition benches and speak up for
Northern Ireland, a team who will work with
their DUP colleagues in the Assembly to
ensure we collectively deliver for you. As
we proved before, more seats means more
influence which means more delivered for
Northern Ireland.
This manifesto and our commitments at this
General Election are focused on ensuring
Northern Ireland can thrive as a secure and
vibrant part of the United Kingdom. We
are seeking a mandate to continue Making
Northern Ireland Work by:
1. Promoting the Union and Removing
Barriers Within the United Kingdom;
2. Putting You First - Delivering Fair and
Equitable Funding for Our NHS, and
Other Public Services;
3. Campaigning to Protect Family Incomes;
4. Unleashing our Full Economic Potential;
5. A Strategic Role for UK Defence and
Security;
6. Backing our Farmers and Food Security;
7. Leading a Fairer - Not Faster – Path
Towards Net-Zero;
8. Defending Our Most Vulnerable;
9. Investing More in National Infrastructure,
and;
10. Standing Up for Victims of Crime.
By voting DUP on 4th July, you can back
our positive plan and ensure our children
inherit Northern Ireland in better shape
than when we found it.
Gavin
Gavin Robinson
Leader, Democratic Unionist Party
Leader’s Message
OUR COMMITMENT
TO YOU...
The Democratic Unionist Party has an experienced track record
of speaking up for you on issues that matter. The DUP has the
strength and depth to be able to make the Pro-Union case and
to unashamedly make the case for Northern Ireland in Parliament.
On 4th July we seek your support to elect Democratic Unionist Members of Parliament who
are committed to...
PROMOTING THE UNION
Working as a strong DUP team to promote and strengthen the case for the Union between
Northern Ireland and the rest of the United Kingdom in Parliament.
PUTTING YOU FIRST
Putting you, the people of Northern Ireland first, by working with other parties in Parliament
to ensure that Northern Ireland’s case is always spotlighted, particularly focusing on the just
cause of a long-term fair and equitable funding model for
Northern Ireland’s needs.
REMOVING BARRIERS WITHIN THE UK
Sending a strong message to a new Government that, building on the progress to date, we
will continue to fight to fully restore Northern Ireland’s place within the United Kingdom,
including removing the application of EU law in our country and the internal Irish Sea
border which it creates.
PROTECTING AGAINST ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION
Campaigning to ensure Northern Ireland is fully protected in law against illegal immigration
and that Northern Ireland is part of a United Kingdom wide immigration policy that works.
DELIVERING IN THE CONSTITUENCY
Delivering an unrivalled, dedicated and professional constituency advice service to
constituents where the issues that matter to you will be championed and help provided
when you, or those you know, need it.
Promoting the Union
The Democratic Unionist Party has an
experienced and unrivalled track record
of making the Pro-Union case for Northern
Ireland in Parliament. Through our
negotiations with the Government, the
DUP has secured meaningful, visible and
practical proposals to deepen connections
throughout our United Kingdom, whilst
driving forward the Northern Ireland
economy. This includes:
3 the establishment of a new U.K East-
West Council to foster deeper links for
Northern Ireland as part of the Union
across business, education and culture;
3 the creation of Intertrade UK to boost,
and remove barriers to, trade throughout
the United Kingdom;
3 a twinning programme for primary
schools, enabling students from Northern
Ireland to benefit from opportunities
across the Union.
Broadband
Northern Ireland is on course to be the first
region in Europe to have 100 per cent fibre
broadband availability because of £150
million delivered by DUP MPs. A recent
Ofcom report, Connected Nations, found
that 91 per cent of all premises in Northern
Ireland have access to full-fibre broadband,
making it by far the best-connected region
within the British Isles.
Pensions Triple Lock
The DUP made the retention of the
triple lock on pensions a key pillar of
our Confidence and Supply Agreement
with the Government in 2017. In the last
Parliament, we have continued to stress the
importance of this guaranteed protection
for pensioners across the United Kingdom.
Jobs and Growth
DUP MPs have secured significant
investment for driving growth, creating jobs
and generating prosperity in every corner
of Northern Ireland. This included:
3 working with UK Ministers to unlock £350
million from the Government for the
Belfast Region City Deal, which will create
up to 20,000 new jobs, build new world-
class visitor experiences and support the
regeneration of our towns and cities;
3 achieving significant progress toward
a Heads of Terms agreement for the
Londonderry and Strabane City Deal and
the Mid South West and Causeway Coast
and Glens Growth deals;
3 £150 million in UK Government funding
for creating and underpinning an
Enhanced Investment Zone in Northern
Ireland, to boost growth and attract
investment;
3 securing a new £10 million fund to boost
investment in strategically important
ports linking Northern Ireland and Great
Britain.
Our Record of Delivering
for Northern Ireland at
Westminster
Help with Energy Costs
and Household Bills
DUP Parliamentarians ensured all
households in Northern Ireland received
the Government’s £600 energy support
payment and benefited from discounted
bills under the Energy Price Guarantee.
They also supported the ‘Essentials
Guarantee’ campaign launched by the
Joseph Rowntree Foundation and Trussell
Trust, which seeks to ensure that, at a
minimum, Universal Credit protects people
from going without essentials.
Stronger Communities
The DUP team at Westminster has
successfully fought for vital funding to
strengthen local communities and support
those who find themselves in challenging
circumstances. This included:
3 delivering a £20 million funding package
for town centre regeneration in Coleraine
and Londonderry;
3 securing tens of millions of pounds in
Levelling Up funding for local projects,
including the redevelopment of
Dundonald International Ice Bowl;
3 fighting for, and delivering, £15 million
in emergency support from the UK
Government to support flood recovery
schemes in Northern Ireland;
3 successfully lobbying the Development
for Levelling Up and Department for
Communities to fund and launch a
scheme to address Non-ACM (Aluminium
Composite Material) cladded buildings in
Northern Ireland, post-Grenfell.
Better Infrastructure
DUP MPs secured almost £5 million through
the Union Connectivity Review to progress
plans for the electrification of the railway
from Belfast to the Border and allowing
Translink to deliver feasibility studies to:
o reopen the Antrim-Lisburn railway
line, with an additional stop at Belfast
International Airport;
o re-instate the Portadown to Armagh
railway line.
They also obtained a Government
commitment to improving the connections
between Northern Ireland and Great Britain,
including through the A75 in Scotland.
More for Public Services
DUP Leader Gavin Robinson was the
first MP to campaign for change on how
Northern Ireland is funded. It is now
accepted that going forward the Treasury’s
contribution to public services in Northern
Ireland must be on the basis of assessed
need. The DUP has led where others have
followed and we will continue to seek to
address the legacy of chronic underfunding
across our government departments.
Levelling Up
The DUP has challenged, and will continue
to challenge, the Government to remedy
low levels of financial support awarded
to projects in Northern Ireland under the
UK Shared Prosperity Fund and press for
a remedy to the lack of a formal appeals
process.
Roll-out of the Armed
Forces Covenant
Brave men and women from Northern
Ireland make an invaluable contribution
to the Armed Forces both at home and
abroad. They and their families deserve
to be treated fairly and equitably in the
provision of key services. In the last term,
DUP MPs:
3 supported the Armed Forces Act 2021,
delivering on our pledge to ensure the
Armed Forces Covenant was legally
protected in Northern Ireland as in other
parts of the United Kingdom;
3 insisted on the appointment of a
Northern Ireland Veterans’ Commissioner
to act as an independent point of contact
for, and support, service families locally.
More for Defence
DUP Leader Gavin Robinson promoted the
significant contribution Spirit Aerospace,
Thales, Harland and Wolff and other
companies in the Aerospace, Defence,
Security and Space sectors play in creating
high-quality and high-paid jobs in Northern
Ireland. He has campaigned to deliver
significant Ministry of Defence contracts to
help secure their future.
The DUP also secured a Government
commitment to launch a review into
Northern Ireland’s role in the UK defence
network. This review will:
o look to increase public and commercial
awareness of the Northern Ireland
defence sector;
o develop proposals to ensure Northern
Ireland is benefiting from investment in
defence industries in the same way as
other parts of the UK;
o explore how to leverage Northern
Ireland’s cyber security clusters and
academic centres of excellence;
o build on established R&D programmes;
o examine how a steady pipeline
of highly-qualified graduates in
science, technology, engineering and
mathematics can generate military and
security capabilities.
Building on our agreement with the
previous Government that the United
Kingdom’s 2% NATO defence spending
target should continue to be met, DUP MPs
continued to pursue an upward trajectory
in defence expenditure during the last
term. The latest NATO figures show that
the UK spent an estimated 2.3% of GDP on
defence in 2023.
Strengthening British
Citizenship
The DUP introduced the British Nationality
(Irish Citizens) Bill to ensure people born
in the Republic of Ireland who have lived
in Northern Ireland or other parts of the
United Kingdom for at least five years can
claim British citizenship without the need
for tests and fees. This legislation was
supported by the Government and became
law in May 2024.
Muckamore Abbey
Public Inquiry
DUP Leader Gavin Robinson was at the
forefront of bringing allegations of abuse
and ill-treatment of patients at Muckamore
Abbey Hospital to public attention. The DUP
successfully fought for the establishment
and commencement of a public inquiry
and continues to advocate for increased
resources to ensure this work, and the
police investigations, continues.
Infected Blood Scandal
The DUP in Parliament has supported
calls for comprehensive compensation
for the victims of the infected blood
scandal. Our MPs signed an Early Day
Motion in July 2023, which recognised
the government’s initial actions in making
interim compensation payments and
called for urgent further compensation
for those affected. When this issue was
raised in Parliament, our MPs have ensured
that Northern Ireland and its citizens were
represented.
Down’s Syndrome
given Minority Status
DUP Parliamentarians have been a
committed and consistent voice for
people with disabilities. One of our MPs
co-sponsored the Down Syndrome Act
2022, the world’s first piece of legislation
recognising people with Down’s syndrome
as a specific minority group.
Justice for NI
Sub-Postmasters
DUP MPs successfully fought to extend
legislation exonerating sub-postmasters
wrongly convicted as a result of the Horizon
IT scandal to Northern Ireland.
Religious Freedom
DUP MPs have been consistent advocates
for freedom of religion or belief both in the
United Kingdom and across the globe.
They have:
3 worked with Open Doors and other non-
government organisations to throw a
spotlight on the persecution of Christians
internationally;
3 supported the International Freedom of
Religion or Belief Bill in Parliament;
3 endorsed the appointment of a special
envoy for freedom of religion and belief;
3 sought additional protections to
ensure government procurement takes
cognisance of international human rights
underpinning freedom of religion.
We will build on this record to ensure that
the rights of those of all faiths and none are
protected across the United Kingdom.
Pro-Life
DUP MPs continued to adopt an
unequivocal and determined pro-life stance
in Parliament, opposing the commissioning
of, and funding for, abortion services in
Northern Ireland. One of our MPs chaired
the pro-life All-Party Parliamentary Group.
Automated External
Defibrillators
A DUP MP brought forward a 10-minute
rule motion on Automated External
Defibrillators (Public Access) Bill 2022-
23 with regards to securing public
access defibrillators in schools and new
public buildings. This was accepted and
implemented by the government with
funding attached.
GCSE in Sign Language
DUP MPs supported plans to consult on the
introduction of British Sign Language as a
GCSE qualification in schools in England,
whilst campaigning for similar steps to be
considered in Northern Ireland.
Baby Loss Certificates
DUP MPs worked closely with colleagues in
the Assembly to seek the introduction of a
Baby Loss Certificate scheme in Northern
Ireland on a similar basis to England.
Working together from
Westminster, at Stormont and in
local government, the DUP has
the strength, depth and experience to
deliver for communities across Northern
Ireland. Since the restoration of devolution
in February, DUP Ministers have been
to the forefront of delivering results for
households, businesses and workers.
Department for
Communities
Outcomes Delivered:
3 Announced the way forward for a sign
language bill, ensuring that deaf people
have the same rights and opportunities
as those in the hearing community;
3 Help for working families by launching
the ‘Intermediate Rent’ product, where
a long-term low interest loan is offered
to an operator to develop a new supply
of affordable homes for rent at 20%
discount off market value;
3 Approved the Northern Ireland Football
Fund – a £36 million fund of investment
into performance clubs, grassroots clubs
and a National Training Centre;
3 Introduced legislation for defective
premises - a bill introduced by
accelerated passage to ensure
homeowners in Northern Ireland enjoy
the protections offered elsewhere in the
UK, as highlighted by the case of Victoria
Square apartments;
3 Launched a new low interest loan
scheme for the Voluntary, Community
& Social Enterprise sector to develop
capital projects to tackle social need,
such as the funding of a new 3G pitch
for Crusaders;
3 Introduced legislation to keep Northern
Ireland in line with the rest of the UK on
pensions and reduce the lower age limit
for auto enrolment and increasing the
amount of qualifying earnings allowing
more young people to start saving earlier;
3 Introduced legislation to introduce a
Pensions Dashboard – a digital service
which will allow individuals to see their
pensions information (including State
pension) in one place online;
3 Progress on an Anti-Poverty and Fuel
Poverty Strategy, so that more people are
helped into work and that we can drive
down poverty in Northern Ireland;
3 Introduced legislation for better
protections to parents using Child
Maintenance Services;
3 Progress on a Disability and Work
Strategy, ensuring no one who wants
to work is prohibited from doing so
because of their disability;
3 Increased the upper property value limit
for Co-Ownership Housing, so that more
people can be supported into home
ownership;
3 Hosted the UK Sports Minister in
Northern Ireland to highlight the need
that exists in local sport;
3 Allocated additional funding in 2023/24:
o £1 million on library books;
o £100,000 towards musical instrument
grants;
o £3 million supporting people
programme – helping vulnerable
people to live independently.
3 Launch of consultation to reduce the
threshold for charity registration to
reduce bureaucracy and burdens on
smaller local charities.
Delivering for Northern Ireland
in the Assembly
Department of
Education Outcomes
Delivered:
3 Settled the long-running industrial action
by teachers and increased the starting
salary for teachers in Northern Ireland to
£30,000;
3 Resolving the pay and grading review
for educational support staff, including
classroom assistants;
3 Announced the biggest step change
to education planning for a generation,
with an ambitious and far-reaching
programme of investment in facilities for
children with special educational needs,
which will transform the education and
lives of our most vulnerable children and
their families;
3 Announced an interim £25 million
package of measures to support children,
parents and providers with early learning
and childcare from September;
3 Announced an additional £80 million of
capital funding for education this year,
which will allow fifteen important new
build and extension and refurbishment
projects for schools from all sectors
to proceed to construction, as well as
the launch of a new programme of
curriculum-led investment;
3 Announced a £20 million programme
of investment to deliver innovative and
community informed approaches to raise
achievement and reduce educational
disadvantage in Northern Ireland;
3 Defended the right of schools and
boards of governors to decide what is
best for their learners against some at
Stormont who think they know better and
want to impose their own ideology on
our children;
3 Announced a new way forward on how
controlled schools are managed by the
Education Authority;
3 Launched a consultation on improving
the affordability of school uniforms;
3 Secured Executive agreement to
provide £150 million of earmarked
additional funding over the next three
years to deliver the Strule Shared
Education Campus in Omagh which
will bring together 4,000 children and
young people from all community
backgrounds on a vibrant and dynamic
education campus of world and
international renown.
1. Promoting the Union
and Removing Barriers
within the United
Kingdom
The DUP will always work to promote
and strengthen the case for the Union
between Northern Ireland and the rest of
the United Kingdom. In Parliament we also
stand ready to work in co-operation with
other Unionists.
The Northern Ireland Protocol was imposed
over the heads of the people of Northern
Ireland and without support from any
unionist elected representative.
It wrecked the settled political balance
within Northern Ireland and led directly
to a loss of unionist confidence. This
party voted against the imposition of
the NI Protocol in both our national
Parliament and the European Parliament
but it was passed by Boris Johnson and the
Conservative Government following the
2019 General Election.
Equally this Party, whilst recognising some
progress had been secured did not support
the Windsor Framework, negotiated
by Rishi Sunak, and spent a further
year in various discussions with the UK
Government about what further progress
could be achieved. We did this while others
simply complained about the problems.
Northern Ireland was cast aside by the
so-called Conservative and Unionist
Party and some of the greatest harm
inflicted on Northern Ireland has been
as a consequence of choices made by
the Conservative Party; endorsed by our
National Parliament.
The truth is that as the leaders of Unionism,
we were left to pick up the pieces and make
the difficult decisions as to what is in the
best long-term interests of Northern Ireland.
We could have complained, but done little
else, leaving power in the hands of those
who delivered so much harm.
Or we could act, in the interests of
Northern Ireland, step by step, to right
the wrongs.
Following many months of discussions
with the Government, it was clear by mid-
January that we had to make a judgement
as to whether we had secured sufficient
progress to allow us to participate in a re-
established Northern Ireland Assembly and
Executive following the ending of those
talks by the Government.
On balance, we judged that it was right to
return to Stormont in the interests of seeing
local decisions being made for the benefit
of all our citizens. Even in the first 100 days,
our Ministers have played a key role in
providing leadership and taking decisions
that have benefitted everyone – from
childcare to grassroots football provision -
decisions that would not have been taken
by direct rule Conservative Ministers.
We returned on the basis of the roadmap
set out in the Government’s Command
Paper. That paper did not secure all of our
negotiating objectives and did not remedy
a number of the long-term problems born
out of the Protocol. It did however contain
some important gains which were worthy
of banking.
These included amongst other things;
3 Parliament legislating to ensure mutual
recognition of standards on goods,
through a goods guarantee throughout
the United Kingdom;
3 the creation of the new U.K East-West
Council which is a new forum, bringing
together all four nations of the United
Kingdom, to meet to work together
Making Northern Ireland Work
and identify opportunities for greater
connections between Northern Ireland
and the rest of the United Kingdom in
areas such as trade, transport, education
and culture;
3 the establishment of Intertrade UK,
a new body to promote trade within
the United Kingdom and to provide
advice and facilitate businesses across
the UK, boosting internal trade, and
to promote the full extent of the UK’s
market to businesses and traders;
3 an Independent Monitoring Panel to
provide oversight of the workings of
new arrangements and to ensure the
Government and other public bodies
are held to account for delivering in a
pragmatic way;
3 a strengthened independent review of
the Windsor Framework underpinned
by a statutory duty to initiate a review
later this year in circumstances
where current arrangements do not
command cross—community support
in the Assembly;
3 a commitment from the Government
on the continued supply of veterinary
medicines in Northern Ireland
beyond 2025;
Whilst progress was made, grounded in
principle, there is more still to do.
Our clear message going forward is that we
are campaigning to send a strong message
to a new Government, whether Labour or
Conservative, that building on the progress
to date, we will continue to fight to fully
restore Northern Ireland’s place within the
United Kingdom, including removing the
application of EU law in our country and the
internal Irish Sea Border it creates.
We will continue to argue the case for the
full primacy of the United Kingdom internal
market and we will continue to reject the
undermining of its integrity.
The Stormont Brake mechanism was
not part of the original Protocol and the
fact that local Members of the Assembly
now have this mechanism is because
the DUP pushed for it and secured it.
We will use it to full effect in the pursuit
of our overall objective.
In October, as part of the NI Assembly vote
on the current arrangements, we will not
hesitate to vote against their continued
application and, drawing upon the new
mechanisms at our disposal, we will continue
our quest through the inbuilt review.
Delivering Confidence-
Building Measures for
Unionist Communities across
Northern Ireland
The Northern Ireland Protocol has acutely
impacted confidence in unionist and loyalist
communities and the DUP is committed
to securing a practical and ongoing
demonstration from future UK Governments
of their commitment to both promoting and
developing British culture, heritage and
traditions in Northern Ireland.
The DUP recognises the need to support
communities that tend to be less able to
avail of other funding opportunities and
where a lack of capacity, networks and
confidence restricts the ability to secure
funding, particularly in rural areas, but also
in urban communities that have felt left
behind over recent years.
We want to assist and develop support
for projects that enhance community
capacity generally, as well as seeing
delivery on long standing commitments
for projects of cultural significance.
DUP MPs will work with the next
Government to build on preparatory work
completed to date and deliver a long-term
programme to support communities.
Strengthening Trust in Politics
Donations
Political donations in Northern Ireland
should be subject to the same regime
as the rest of the United Kingdom. In
particular, the foreign donation loophole
must be closed which sees Northern Ireland
stand alone in the British Isles as the only
place where foreign donations of money
can influence politics.
House of Lords Reform
The DUP remains committed to reform of
the House of Lords. We believe it should
be a smaller chamber, with a majority of
its membership elected. The distribution
of seats should strengthen representation
for the devolved regions. Any reform of
the Upper Chamber should respect the
primacy of the House of Commons in our
parliamentary democracy. DUP MPs will
also seek to ensure practices in a reformed
Lords reflect, and balance, both the values
and traditions of communities from which
its membership is drawn.
Sinn Fein Allowances
The DUP remains committed to urging
both the Government and Commons
authorities to end the obscenity of Sinn
Fein’s abstentionist MPs receiving expenses
and allowances despite not attending
Parliament.
2. Putting You First -
Delivering Fair and
Equitable Funding for
our NHS, and other
Public Services
The DUP believes underfunding has
systematically destroyed Northern Ireland’s
capacity to provide frontline services that
are fit for the 21st century.
Northern Ireland has the highest
proportion of public sector workers in
the United Kingdom. Only Scotland’s
population is more dispersed. Yet when
it comes to distributing money under
the Barnett Formula, Northern Ireland
receives less than it needs to match public
services in England. That means money
for health reform and pay awards simply
does not go far enough. It means the
money to repair our roads and increase
school budgets does not exist. Meanwhile
Scotland continues to receive more than
it needs and Wales benefits from the
protection of a funding floor.
The Democratic Unionist Party has led
the charge for a new needs-based
funding model for Northern Ireland.
Our campaign is now mainstream
and the Government has been forced
to accept a new definition of need
going forward. However, fundamental
problems remain unresolved.
While the other parties welcomed the
financial package presented by the
Government on the return of devolution
earlier this year, the DUP made it clear that
what was offered fell well short of what was
required to put our public finances on a
stable footing.
The failure to baseline the new formula from
the CSR period in 2022, will lead to a further
cliff edge in just two years’ time. At that
point funding levels will again drop below
what is required to fairly and sustainably
fund services on a comparable basis to
those in England – and potentially stay there
for decades.
The DUP believes this situation is
unacceptable. It will only be avoided by
reaching agreement on a new, responsible,
long-term fiscal framework that equitably
funds our public services.
In the next Parliament, DUP MPs will
press the next Government to ensure that
funding cannot drop below the definition of
assessed need in NI - £124 for every £100
spent in England.
We will also campaign for Northern
Ireland’s baseline funding to be increased
proportionately by the same amount
above need as the Government applied
to Wales with a new needs-based factor
and 5% transitional uplift. Collectively
this will be worth hundreds of millions
of pounds in additional resources for
our government departments every year
moving forward.
Building a Better Health Service
The DUP believes our National Health
Service is the jewel in the crown of the
Union and must be prioritised throughout
the United Kingdom.
In the last term, DUP MPs have sought to
improve access for patients in Northern
Ireland to NHS services and treatments
available in other parts of the United
Kingdom. This included pursuing greater
access for women seeking surgery for
endometriosis, campaigning on rare diseases
and ensuring Cystic Fibrosis sufferers have
access to wonder drug Orkambi.
We have also recognised the need to
end disparities between arrangements
benefiting health staff working in Northern
Ireland and the rest of the United
Kingdom. This is essential for the delivery
of primary care in particular, for skills
retention, as well as for wider reforms of
health and social care.
Going forward, DUP MPs will campaign to:
3 drive waiting lists down - fostering
large-scale partnerships between
health and social care in NI and national
independent providers or not-for-profit
organisations;
3 provide fellowships for young GPs in
substantive posts;
3 commission a practitioner health
scheme;
3 provide a permanent state-backed
scheme for indemnity for GPs;
3 ensure a fair and equitable approach to
pensions and residence for qualified GPs
seeking to live and work in the United
Kingdom;
3 establish clusters of universities,
business and clinicians throughout
the UK to harness and accelerate the
use of new medical technology and
diagnostics;
3 support accessible and portable health
information throughout a patient’s life;
3 tackle the harm caused by smoking and
vaping, including through exploring
alternative options such as raising the
age of sale to 21. Any restriction of the
right of adults to make choices must
always be justified.
We have been committed to improving
care and support for those with a terminal
illness. Two of our MPs, Party Leader Gavin
Robinson and Carla Lockhart, are members
of the Dying Well APPG. They have:
3 supported a change in the law to allow
those with a life expectancy of up to 12
months to get faster and easier access to
certain benefits and pensions;
3 promoted better quality and better
access to palliative care so people across
the United Kingdom can have a valued
end-of-life experience.
The DUP will continue to press for
enhanced provision for families affected
by terminal diagnoses. We will also firmly
oppose efforts to legalise assisted suicide.
Public Sector Pay
The DUP is alarmed that pay awards for
public sector staff have not kept pace with
other parts of the United Kingdom. This is
another symptom of chronic underfunding
of our public services from Westminster.
Our nurses, doctors, police officers and
teachers deserve to receive fair pay and
conditions for the vital work that they do. It
is wrong that too many of our best public
servants are now employed by agencies
rather than the public sector.
DUP MPs will:
3 engage in discussions with the UK
Government about public sector pay
across the UK, including as part of a new
fiscal framework for Northern Ireland;
3 campaign for recurrent funding to
provide decent pay awards;
3 support strategies to improve
occupational support and attract, recruit,
train and retain frontline staff;
Civil Service Reform
The DUP values the work and contribution
of our dedicated civil servants. However, we
feel that a lack of requisite skills, expertise
and senior leadership in the Northern
Ireland Civil Service has contributed
significantly to the lack of progress in
delivering key infrastructure projects in
Northern Ireland, such as the York Street
Interchange and the A5, in recent years.
The Northern Ireland Civil Service is
different to its counterparts in Scotland and
Wales. Whereas the civil service in Scotland
and Wales remain part of the UK Home
Civil Service, NICS Civil Service is a stand-
alone body and as a result has been unable,
and at times unwilling, to benefit from
economies of scale in terms of skills present
in the public sector in Great Britain.
We sought to tackle this during our
negotiations with the Government. The
Safeguarding the Union command paper
sets out a programme for skills exchange
between the NICS and the UK Home Civil
Service. Encouraging those secondments
and movement across all parts of the UK
will boost capacity and help bring specific
expertise to projects where necessary.
The DUP will seek the faithful
implementation of these schemes, the
expansion of short-term placements and
the recruitment of more external experts
to achieve better outcomes within our civil
service. Northern Ireland is well placed to
benefit from greater integration with the
Home Civil Service.
3. Campaigning to
Protect Family Incomes
As the cost-of-living crisis continues to place
new and significant pressures on household
budgets, the DUP is clear that Government
should do more to protect incomes, ensure
taxation is fair, with more remaining in the
pockets of working people, and ensuring
that wages are able to lift more people out
of poverty.
DUP MPs will campaign to:
3 oppose the freeze on the personal tax
allowance and higher rate income tax
threshold;
3 seek further reductions in national
insurance, building on consecutive cuts
in the last Parliament;
3 support an increase in the starting age
for employee national insurance;
3 encourage the Government to explore
the merits of moving to single tax on
all income, replacing income tax and
national insurance;
3 support the uprating of benefits in line
with inflation;
3 continue to support rises to the national
living wage;
3 maintain the national minimum wage
above two-thirds of median income;
3 freeze Vehicle Excise Duty and look to
better link future rates to road use;
3 abolish VAT on domestic electricity bills;
3 maintain the freeze on fuel duty;
3 tackle the soaring cost of motor
insurance by:
• opposing any increase in Insurance
Premium Tax;
• supporting a UK-wide
investigation into fairness of
insurance industry practices – to
include reviewing the role of
Financial Conduct Authority.
Easing the Burden on Families
The DUP continues to stand on the side
of families across Northern Ireland,
many of whom are feeling the squeeze
as a result of high childcare bills and
soaring costs for basic goods such as
food and utilities.
DUP MPs:
3 supported legislation which would
see the thresholds for child benefit
be determined by household income
instead of individual income. This
helped force the Government into
increasing the point at which this benefit
begins to be clawed back, bringing
relief to working families.
3 campaigned for an increase in the Tax-
Free Childcare Allowance;
3 proposed scrapping VAT on school
uniforms;
In the next Parliament, we will support
proposals to:
3 increase the Tax-Free Childcare
allowance from 20% to 35%;
3 remove the cap on Tax Free Childcare
(TFC) above £2,000;
3 implement an ‘Essential Guarantee’ in
Universal Credit, ensuring the standard
allowance cannot reduce below a legal
minimum amount required to afford
basic essentials;
3 remove the two-child limit on Universal
Credit for 3-and 4-child households;
3 scrap VAT on school uniforms;
3 apply the High-Income Child Benefit
charge on the basis of household, rather
than individual, income.
Childcare for Working Parents
The lack of access to affordable, flexible
and high-quality childcare has a negative
impact on employment and recruitment
and retention of staff in frontline services
in particular. In many cases, parents are
working reduced or condensed hours, or
not all, in order to meet childcare needs,
due to cost and availability of alternative
provision. For this reason, the DUP
Education Minister Paul Givan MLA has
announced a fresh package of measures
worth £25 million designed to:
3 stabilise and support expansion of the
early learning and childcare sector;
3 offer all children 22.5 hours pre-school
education per week, and;
3 reduce childcare bills for working parents
through a Northern Ireland Childcare
Subsidy Scheme.
At this election, DUP candidates are
supporting the need for flexible childcare
work policies that are co-designed with
parents, teachers and employers. If elected,
they will:
3 work with employers and HMRC to
incentivise the Workplace Nursery
Model in NI, including through removing
unnecessary complexity;
3 promote access to capital grants for
businesses and employers seeking to
establish workplace nursery sites.
Pensions
The DUP believes the next government
should be in the business of helping people
to plan for, and secure, a good income
in retirement. Importantly that means
encouraging saving, developing a culture of
saving, and also enabling employees to get
more value out of their pension pots.
The DUP has consistently opposed
attempts to dismantle or dilute the triple
lock on pensions. Our MPs have also
been to the forefront of the campaign
for redress by thousands of WASPI
women in Northern Ireland who were
mistreated by the Department of Work
and Pensions in relation to changes to
the State Pension Age. This has included
being incredibly vocal on the need for
government to urgently progress a
scheme for compensation.
Going forward, we will:
3 act to support the Triple Lock on state
pensions;
3 support the personal allowance for
pensioners always being above the
amount of the state pension;
3 oppose any further rise in the state
pension age;
3 support a review of auto-enrolment,
whilst ensuring no additional costs for
business;
3 campaign to ensure Northern Ireland
receives necessary funding to address
age discrimination identified in the
McCloud judgement relating to changes
to public service pensions;
3 continue to seek suitable
compensation and fair transitional
State Pension arrangements for women
born in the 1950s;
3 support small business owners to fund
their retirement by retaining Business
Asset Disposal Relief and keeping the
value of relief in line with increases to the
standard lifetime allowance for pensions.
A Brighter Future for our
Young People
The DUP is committed to ensuring our
children and young people not only have
the best start in life but the opportunities
required to fulfil their potential and play a
full part in our society.
DUP MPs will campaign to:
3 deliver increased economic and
educational opportunities for young
people by building relationships across
the United Kingdom, including through
the U.K East-West Council;
3 promote a joined-up approach to
educational under-achievement across
our four nations, with a focus on adult
numeracy;
3 reduce disparities in support
between under-20s who undertake
apprenticeships and those in this
age group who remain in school or
education, including through retaining
child benefit or subsidising travel costs;
3 reintroduce financial incentives for
businesses that hire young apprentices at
risk of long-term unemployment;
3 promote apprenticeships as part of a
strategy for supporting young people
leaving care;
3 seek to address the soaring cost of motor
insurance for young people, including
through exploring the potential for
measures such as:
• graduated driving licences;
• a restriction on the number of young
passengers;
• a lower blood alcohol limit for
young drivers.
Licence Fee
In the last four years, the DUP has fought
for a fairer deal for BBC licence feepayers.
This included:
o opposing hikes in the BBC
licence fee;
o pursuing more transparency in
the commissioning process and
recruitment of staff;
o challenging the award of salaries
to political commentators
masquerading as TV presenters;
As media consumption patterns change,
most people spend less time on
traditional channels and consume more
media online via phones and tablets. The
people who in the main depend more
on the traditional channels are older
people. Yet this is the group the BBC
has betrayed by scrapping free licence
fees for over 75s. We will campaign to
reverse this.
We will continue to seek the abolition of
the BBC licence fee and the creation of a
successful subscription-based service to
replace it. In the interim, the licence should
be frozen, then cut.
4. Unleashing our Full
Economic Potential
The Democratic Unionist Party has been,
and remains, committed to growing the
Northern Ireland economy. We want to
see an ambitious approach taken toward
creating more and better jobs, which in
turn will lead to greater prosperity for all of
our people.
Between 2007 and 2021, the DUP has
helped create 50,000 jobs and ensure we
punched well above our weight within the
UK in terms of securing record levels of
investment.
In the last five years alone, we have
unlocked more funding for City and
Growth deals, attracted major defence
contracts to our shores and scaled up
efforts to make Northern Ireland a hub
within the United Kingdom for advanced
and low-carbon manufacturing as well as a
global leader in hydrogen technology and
production. However, this is not the limit of
our ambitions.
Small and Medium Sized
Enterprises (SMEs)
The DUP values the diverse mix of SMEs
across all sectors of the Northern Ireland
economy. We want to increase the
number of SMEs established, growing and
competing globally as part of our vision
to make Northern Ireland one of the elite,
small and open economies in the world.
However, if this is to be achieved, and if we
are to help them to reach their full potential,
we must first address the challenges that
are threatening the survival of many of
these businesses.
DUP MPs will campaign to:
3 increase the VAT threshold for SMEs
to £100,000 and then uprate it in line
with inflation;
3 drive up the number of SMEs benefiting
from government procurement spend,
tax reliefs and business support;
3 protect cash flow for SMEs by tackling
late payments to small suppliers as part
of government contracts;
3 ensure national insurance liability
for small businesses is fair - the
Employment Allowance should be
uprated in line with increases to the
national living wage;
3 promote greater awareness of capital
allowances and R&D reliefs among local
businesses;
3 seek to reduce retail crime by creating a
standalone offence for assaults on staff.
Regulation of Online
Marketplaces
It is wrong that that online giants and
marketplaces can undercut shops on
our high streets, who often pay more in
rates than those online retailers pay in
taxes. The DUP believes there should
be a step change in how government
regulates this area, particularly given that
working families have been expected to
lose more of their income in taxes than
previous generations.
We will:
3 explore the potential introduction of
an online sales tax targeting online
corporates and marketplaces;
3 support robust efforts to crack down on
global tax evading corporations.
VAT
The DUP wants to see the Value Added
Tax system better utilised to incentivise
investments that promote improved
productivity through low-carbon
and green technologies. We will also
continue to campaign for a reduction
in VAT for hospitality across the United
Kingdom in order to address the
comparative disadvantage facing local
businesses as a result of a reduced rate
in the Irish Republic.
Research and Development
It is clear that the United Kingdom’s national
target for research and development has
lacked ambition. Statistics indicate that the
official target of 2.4% of GDP by 2027 has
already been exceeded, yet R&D intensity
lags well behind that achieved in other
leading nations, including Germany and the
United States. That should change.
DUP MPs would back proposals to:
3 increase the official target for UK
Research & Development spend to at
least 3.0% of GDP by 2027 and to a G7-
leading intensity by 2030;
3 support long-term ambitious
innovation programmes benefiting all
parts of the UK;
3 expand UK Research & Development
tax relief for small and medium
sized enterprises to include capital
expenditure;
3 review how Innovate UK grants are
administered to increase opportunities
for local input and take account of the
needs of industry and institutions here;
3 require universities to provide up-front
clarity on Intellectual Property ownership
before conducting joint R&D activity with
businesses and students.
Boosting Trade and Exports
At the last election, the DUP set out a clear
vision to better incorporate Northern Ireland’s
export potential into it’s trade ambitions by
employing more staff, greater advertising and
ramping up the number of trade missions to
benefit local firms and producers. Progress
has been achieved in this with Invest NI’s
global footprint expanded with the support
of UK Government funding and more trade
advisers recruited. We want to see the next
Government go even further.
In particular, we will:
3 support the development a new UK
export strategy with a specific trade
plan for NI;
3 seek government funding to help
expand NI’s trade presence across the
world, including through recruitment of
more staff;
3 make support by trade advisors locally
more accessible and tailored to the
ambitions of those seeking to export
goods and services outside of the UK;
3 seek to provide export vouchers to help
firms with the costs of exporting to a
new market for the first time or for travel
to international trade shows in new or
emerging markets;
3 aim to strengthen links between the
Department for Business and Trade and
Invest NI to grow export sales, including
consideration of a more visible
presence in NI;
3 pursue an increase in the level of
digital exports;
3 work toward the implementation of a
Single Trade Window for imports and
exports;
3 seek to ensure Northern Ireland’s
interests, export potential, and the
barriers facing traders locally, are
reflected by the Government in the
review of the UK/EU Trade and Co-
operation Agreement in 2026;
3 aim to review the monitoring and
evaluation framework used by the
Department for Business and Trade to
monitor its export promotion activities;
3 pursue further discussions with the
Government on extending the benefits
of the freeports programme to
Northern Ireland.
Advanced Manufacturing
The DUP is focused on unleashing the
potential of emerging economic sectors
that are best placed to add value to
the Northern Ireland economy. We will
consolidate Northern Ireland’s place as a
global destination for investment within the
United Kingdom. Advanced manufacturing
and engineering are among the most
productive local sectors, with job creation
and survival rates for new firms higher than
those in the wider economy.
DUP MPs will press for a new national
industrial strategy in which advanced
manufacturing and other thriving sectors,
including digital, agri-tech, life and health
sciences and fintech - are prioritised
through effective support, fair regulation
and have the certainty to plan, expand
and innovate. We will also press the
Government to retain the Full Expensing
rules for capital investment.
Hydrogen
Northern Ireland is fast emerging as an
innovator in hydrogen technology. Many
recognise that Northern Ireland is leading
the world in terms of hydrogen usage in
the transport sector. Companies such as
Wrightbus are developing cutting-edge
technologies which are revolutionising
whole sectors. Indeed, it is estimated that it
could in time meet approximately one-third
of local energy needs.
The DUP has consulted key stakeholders
to develop a Hydrogen Growth Strategy
and we will continue to seize, exploit
and maximise economic and social
opportunities associated with hydrogen.
Our Province boasts a comparative
advantage in this field because of our
location and open coastlines, which
present scope for off-shore wind
technology and generation.
There is also an established, and
growing, presence of local academia and
entrepreneurs across Northern Ireland.
We will:
3 seek a dedicated Hydrogen Innovation
Strategy;
3 support investing in skills via a
new dedicated green hydrogen
apprenticeship programme;
3 open discussions with the UK
Government to consider funding streams
and incentives for SME innovation in the
hydrogen sector.
Skills
The DUP believes that a failure to invest
in, and strengthen, Northern Ireland’s
skills base holds our economy back and
represents missed opportunities to create
jobs and lift more people out of poverty.
We are committed to putting into action
strategies which adopt a sustainable
and sustained approach to identifying
and meeting skills shortages in key and
emerging sectors of our economy and
throughout public services.
DUP MPs will:
3 support the establishment of an
Independent UK Skills Commission with
representation for Northern Ireland and
the other devolved regions. This body
would be tasked with assessing our
current and future labour needs, with a
remit to scrutinise policy and decisions
taken at national and devolved level;
3 press the next Government to use the
tax system to incentivise businesses to
upskill and re-skill employees in skills
shortage areas.
Apprenticeships
The DUP remains committed to replacing
the Apprenticeship Levy with a new system
that ensures ringfenced contributions by
employers and government are reinvested
in skills. DUP Economy Ministers led on
an Apprenticeship Recovery Package
during the Covid period to minimise
apprenticeship job losses, maintain and
grow the supply of apprenticeships.
Any new training levy must be co-designed
with the private sector and deliver
opportunities for businesses to attract
and upskill their workforce irrespective of
sector or size. It must also be flexible as
our economy pivots toward green growth
and other exciting fast-growing industries.
The quality of apprenticeship training in
Northern Ireland is already extraordinarily
high and that is testament to those
delivering these schemes day in day out.
However, our apprenticeships and skills
offering needs to evolve and keep pace
with demand for skills both across industry
and in frontline services.
In driving this forward, DUP MPs will seek to:
3 deliver more all-age, public sector and
SME-led apprenticeships;
3 ensure funding arrangements enable
those undertaking apprenticeships to
work anywhere in the United Kingdom;
3 promote a consistent approach to
the design of the curriculum for
apprenticeships across the UK, ensuring
employers of all sizes are equipped to
deliver this training;
3 increase female representation in STEM
apprenticeships;
3 continue to explore the potential
introduction of a Nursing Higher Level
Apprenticeship Framework;
3 ensure the drive to expand
apprenticeships is part of a joined-up
approach to careers advice.
Access to Labour
The DUP welcomes the fact those coming
from the EU and the rest of the world to
work in Northern Ireland are now treated
on the same basis. However, the current
system of work visas has proven ineffective
in responding to the pressing needs of
businesses and employers across the
United Kingdom.
There are particular concerns in Northern
Ireland about labour shortages in key
industries such as agri-food and hospitality,
whilst for many smaller businesses the costs
of accessing the system have effectively cut
off this route to meeting the growth needs
of their company.
We will promote a more agile and
responsive migration system.
DUP MPs will seek:
3 a review of the structure and
operation of the Migration Advisory
Committee (MAC). This should include
consideration of formal representation
from the devolved regions and
how a reformed MAC could work in
partnership with a new Independent
Skills Commission to map and meet
labour shortages across the UK;
3 progress on the recommendations of
the Independent Review into Labour
Shortages in the Food Supply Chain,
including ensuring Northern Ireland
benefits from a new comprehensive
strategy to enhance the sector’s
attractiveness;
3 to ensure fair minimum salary
thresholds for skilled overseas
workers to protect food production,
manufacturing, hospitality and the
provision of health and social care. The
current threshold is £38,700, well above
the average salary in NI;
3 a multi-year rolling seasonal workers
scheme for agriculture with a suitable
length visa;
3 to make it easier for international
students qualifying in primary
care roles, such as GPs, to gain
permanent residence - ensuring our
Health Service can realise the full
benefit of increasing the number of
training places.
Access to Finance
The DUP recognises that many businesses
are struggling to keep their heads above
water because of increasing costs and
higher interest rates. We believe banks
and financial institutions need to do
more to support their customers in these
challenging times. This is particularly the
case for those in the agri-food chain,
who are facing spiralling input costs
coupled with slim price margins, and
SMEs, who are often dissuaded from
borrowing by the need to put up
significant personal guarantees.
DUP MPs will support:
3 the extension of the Growth Guarantee
Scheme, providing a 70% guarantee
to participating lenders on finance
provided to SMEs, for the duration of
the next Parliament;
3 encouraging banks and lenders to
provide additional low-cost finance
options for firms across the UK;
3 a review of small business lending, with
an emphasis on assessing the impact
of unnecessary personal guarantees on
investment by SMEs;
3 bringing more small businesses under
the scope of the Financial Conduct
Authority (FCA) consumer duty and
Financial Ombudsman Service (FOS).
Banking Hubs
Recent years have seen a large number of
bank branches closing in towns and villages
across Northern Ireland, indeed across the
whole of the United Kingdom. This impacts
older people, the vulnerable and those
living in rural areas, where banks have been
a visible part of the social fabric.
The DUP supports protecting access to cash
and other banking services for those who
are less likely to use online services, as well
as the businesses and high streets impacted
by decreased footfall. That should include
the provision of an ATM or cash point in
each of our towns and villages.
Northern Ireland’s first banking hub has
been established in Kilkeel. It is a shared
service that operates in a similar way to a
standard branch, with a counter service
run by Post Office staff where customers
of almost any bank can withdraw and
pay in cash, pay bills and carry out
regular transactions.
The DUP will:
3 work with banks to establish more
banking hubs on our high streets and
town centres;
3 campaign to ensure government and
financial institutions fund a scheme
covering establishment costs for
banking hubs;
3 support continuity of local branch
services while an alternative model is
in place.
Debanking
The DUP will support tighter rules to
protect businesses and consumers
from having their bank account frozen
and closed unfairly. There should be a
substantive notice period before accounts
can be closed and a requirement for banks
to provide clear explanations for what they
have chosen to do. Nobody should have
their bank account closed because of their
political views or because somebody else
decides they are not politically correct.
Insurance
The recent spikes in home and car
insurance premiums have not just affected
families. Businesses are deeply frustrated
that insurance companies continue to
generate huge profits, while they face
increasing pressures on all fronts. The
DUP will look to increase transparency in
how insurance products are advertised,
so businesses and consumers can make
informed decisions. We will also support a
market review into professional indemnity
insurance (PII).
Artificial Intelligence
The DUP wants to see the United
Kingdom harness the potential of
Artificial Intelligence and smart data to
build stronger communities and drive
economic growth. However just as AI
brings many benefits, it also carries
significant risk. We will oppose plans
to allow AI developers to use existing
music, literature and works of art without
permission or payment and disregarding
copyright laws.
DUP MPs will also seek more robust, but
proportionate, regulation of data and
emerging technologies in order to crack
down on abuse, harmful practices such
deepfakes and efforts to undermine
democracy through misinformation and
disinformation.
Workers’ Rights
We have already shown our support
for public sector staff by leading
the charge for changes to Northern
Ireland’s funding model so their needs
in terms of fair pay can be met. In the
Assembly we delivered a statutory
entitlement for parental bereavement
leave in the last mandate as well as
a commitment to see that urgently
extended to support those who sadly
experience miscarriage.
In the last Parliament, new employment
protections were enacted in Great
Britain, including:
3 new legal rights for parents of children
requiring neonatal care;
3 the right to unpaid leave for employees
with caring responsibilities;
3 protection for workers who receive tips;
3 increased rights for employees on or
recently returned, from family leave in a
redundancy situation.
These developments leave disparities for
staff in Northern Ireland which ought to be
remedied.
Corporation Tax
In our 2022 Assembly Election manifesto,
the DUP argued that the necessary capacity
did not exist in the contemporary context
of Northern Ireland to devolve additional
fiscal powers. That remains our position at
this time.
Lowering the rate of corporation
tax in Northern Ireland has been a
longstanding DUP policy. This would
boost Northern Ireland as an attractive
investment opportunity, building on
the strength, skill and ingenuity of our
workforce. The minimum effective 15%
rate in the Irish Republic places firms
in Northern Ireland at a competitive
disadvantage and we want to see this
addressed. We continue to advocate for
a reduction in corporate tax across the
United Kingdom and DUP MPs opposed
the increase in the main UK corporation
tax rate from 19% to 25% in 2023.
The DUP believes there are a number of
fundamental issues that require resolution
with the Treasury before the powers to vary
corporation tax rates - which are already
provided for in law - can be enacted. We
are clear that progress must be based on
solid foundations. That means ensuring a
process of implementation that protects
spending on public services in the short to
medium-term.
5. A Strategic Role
for UK Defence and
Security
The Democratic Unionist Party believes
that now more than ever there is a need to
strengthen the United Kingdom’s defence
industrial base and grow our Armed Forces.
Putin’s abhorrent invasion of Ukraine and
the proliferation of cyber threats from China,
Iran and North Korea has demonstrated the
importance of the UK being equipped with
the military and intelligence capabilities to
protect our national interests.
Without a vision to deter and respond to
residual threats posed by those intent on
undermining our democratic institutions
and harming our citizens, we believe the
UK’s role in a volatile and fast-changing
global landscape will become increasingly
precarious. The multi-faceted and ever-
evolving nature of the challenges we face
requires a constant appraisal of our Armed
Forces and intelligence agencies to ensure
they are not only fighting-fit but equipped
with the right skillsets to respond in an agile
and decisive fashion irrespective of the
threat facing them.
DUP MPs will pursue the greater
integration of Northern Ireland into our
national defence structures, networks
and operations. This is in keeping with
the principle of consent and the Belfast
Agreement. We support calls for the UK
to use an increased RAF and Royal Navy
presence in Northern Ireland to fortify its
northwestern naval and air patrol presence.
This can act as a deterrent to attempts by
Russia to target western critical undersea
infrastructure around the UK, a threat which
the Republic of Ireland also faces.
Defence Spending
The stakes are too high to view defence
expenditure as a burden, rather than a
benefit. It needs to increase immediately to
meet the challenges posed to liberty and
democracy by state actors and terrorism.
The DUP believes the UK should commit to
spending 3.0% of GDP on defence by 2035.
NATO
The United Kingdom has rightly made an
unshakeable commitment to NATO and
we support continued cooperation with
key strategic partners in protecting our
national interests and practically supporting
the cause of freedom abroad, including in
Ukraine. However, we are also clear that
as a country we need to be able to stand
on our own feet and retain the sovereign
strategic and operational independence to
act decisively to preserve the security of our
borders and communities.
NI Defence Industries
The aerospace, defence, security, and
space sectors in Northern Ireland continue
to thrive, employing 9,000 people and
providing over 500 apprenticeships for
people across Northern Ireland.
In evidence to a recent inquiry by the
Northern Ireland Affairs Committee, the
Ministry of Defence stated that its strategic
suppliers in Northern Ireland include: -
3 Cooneen Defence - which provides
combat uniform and occupational
clothing to the armed forces.
3 Harland & Wolff - part of Team Resolute
(a UK consortium consisting of Navantia,
Harland & Wolff and BMT). They have
been awarded the Fleet Solid Support
(FSS) ship programme. This will deliver a
class of three solid store vessels for the
Royal Fleet Auxiliary, delivering more
than 1,200 new UK shipyard jobs across
Harland & Wolff’s Belfast, Appledore and
other sites.
3 Spirit AeroSystems - which manufactures
aerostructures for defence platforms and
have expertise in advanced composite
manufacturing solutions. They are
designing and developing the Royal Air
Force’s Lightweight Affordable Novel
Combat Aircraft (LANCA) while also
collaborating on Team Tempest to deliver
the UK’s Future Combat Air System (FCAS).
3 Thales – the firm employs more than 500
people across the defence and space
sectors. Thales’s Northern Ireland site
specifically produces the Next generation
Light Anti-tank Weapons (NLAWs), along
with the STARStreak and Lightweight
Multi role Missile (LMM) which have been
central to the UK’s support to Ukraine.
Belfast is also home to the global Space
Electric Propulsion Integration Centre, a
joint venture between Thales and Thales
Alenia Space.
Despite these successes, there is still
untapped potential to grow the ADS
industry and unlock further economic
opportunity for those living and working in
our communities.
Since 2019, DUP MPs have pressed the
Ministry of Defence to address historically
and disproportionately low levels of spend
from its procurement budget in Northern
Ireland. Although this work is starting to pay
dividends, in 2022/23, MOD expenditure
per person with UK industry was still only
£100 in Northern Ireland compared to a
regional average of £380 in Scotland and
England, and £250 in Wales. There is much
more that can be achieved.
DUP MPs will:
3 work to increase the number of major
MoD contracts placed in Northern
Ireland;
3 encourage MoD support for the creation
of an official defence and security
cluster in Northern Ireland, similar to
the South West Regional Defence and
Security Cluster;
3 promote the creation of more high-
quality, well-paid and secure jobs in the
ADS sector;
3 advocate for the MoD to address low
levels of investment in defence SMEs
in NI - they received just 0.15% of such
spend in 2022/23;
3 press for regional breakdowns of indirect
expenditure on local defence SMEs;
3 promote a greater understanding of
NI defence industries and regional
supply chains within MoD and wider
government;
3 pursue specific targets for defence spend
in Northern Ireland;
3 propose a small grants scheme for local
businesses attending meet-the-buyer
events in GB;
3 ensure the next Government expedites
a review into public and commercial
awareness of the Northern Ireland
defence sector;
3 ensure future skills policies prioritise
a steady pipeline of apprenticeships
and highly-qualified graduates in STEM
subjects in order to generate military and
security capabilities;
3 support outreach, and formal links,
between NI’s defence community and
schools, particularly in deprived and hard
to reach areas;
3 press for the appointment of Export
Advocates for all ADS’ sectors, building
upon the Defence Export Advocate model;
3 seek to reduce barriers to defence
and security export growth by
reviewing UK’s export promotion and
licensing functions.
Nuclear
The DUP will support increased spending
to safeguard the UK’s nuclear deterrent.
We want to ensure that Northern Ireland’s
industrial and manufacturing base can
benefit from the economic opportunities
provided by major investment in the
readiness of our nuclear forces over the
next decade.
Armed Force and Veterans
In the last Parliament, the DUP was a
relentless advocate for veterans and those
from Northern Ireland who bravely and
proudly serve in our Armed Forces. The full
roll-out of the Armed Forces Covenant in
Northern Ireland and the appointment of a
Veterans Commissioner were testament to
this work, however we recognise that there
is still much to do to ensure service families
can gain access to support and have a full
stake in our society.
DUP MPs will:
3 explore the potential expansion of the
Armed Forces Covenant Duty to include
employment, pensions, social care and
criminal justice;
3 promote a UK-wide memorandum of
understanding on access to public
services, and bespoke support, for
service children with special educational
needs;
3 call on the government to consider
disregarding War Pensions and Armed
Forces Compensation Scheme as income
from benefits and pensions;
3 continue to call on the Government to
ensure that all Afghan citizens who risked
their lives to assist our Armed Forces
against the Taliban are urgently resettled
in the UK and do not face deportation
while seeking asylum.
Northern Ireland-Related
Terrorism
In Northern Ireland, there is an
enduring threat posed by dissident
republicans and the repugnant and life-
changing attack on DCI John Caldwell
underlines the need for a sustained,
laser-sharp focus on rooting out those
still intent on perpetrating murder and
bloodshed on our streets. We welcome
the role played by the national
intelligence community in helping to
erode the capabilities of splinter groups
like the New IRA and to take prominent
terrorists out of circulation.
Our security forces should have at their
disposal the powers and autonomy
required to defeat these groups. The
DUP will advocate for an uplift in funding
provided by the Government for additional
security needs in Northern Ireland. We
also want to address lengthy delays
trying terrorism cases in our courts, whilst
bringing sentencing for serious offences
into line with higher tariffs elsewhere in the
United Kingdom.
It is unacceptable that terrorist defendants
should be given different sentences
depending on whether they are arrested
and prosecuted in Great Britain or Northern
Ireland. The DUP supports enshrining
a presumption that there should be
consistency of sentencing principles for
such cases throughout the United Kingdom.
This should be delivered through the
creation of a sentencing guidelines body
akin to those established in Scotland, and in
England and Wales, to ensure the ongoing
injustice of shorter sentences being
imposed for terrorism offences in Northern
Ireland is addressed.
Foreign Development Aid
The DUP wants to see the United Kingdom
consolidate its position as one of the
world’s most generous donors of foreign
aid. We will achieve this by urging the next
Government to:
3 restore the UK foreign aid budget to
0.7% of gross national income (GNI);
3 spend a higher proportion of the
foreign aid budget on bilateral aid and
humanitarian assistance - more than a
quarter was spent inside the UK in 2023;
3 review the number and profile of
countries currently in receipt of UK aid;
3 target more support toward poorer
nations.
Immigration
The DUP supported an end to the free
movement of people from European
countries in the last Parliament. We remain
committed to the aims of a firm, fair and
controlled immigration system where the
rules for those seeking to come to the
United Kingdom are governed solely by
our national parliament and are equally
and fully applicable in all parts of the
United Kingdom.
The courts have ruled that Government’s
policy on sending illegal migrants to
Rwanda cannot extend to Northern Ireland
because of Article 2 of the Protocol. That
risks making Northern Ireland a magnet
for asylum seekers seeking to escape
enforcement.
DUP MPs will:
3 fight to ensure national immigration
and asylum policy applies equally
across the United Kingdom by restoring
Parliamentary sovereignty over the law in
Northern Ireland;
3 support an approach that allows those
fleeing war or persecution to find refuge
in the United Kingdom, underpinned by:
• renewed efforts to smash and deter
crime gangs who profit from illegal
and unsafe transports across the
Channel;
• a recognition that our neighbours and
allies must do their fair share;
• speedier and more efficient processes
for dealing with asylum claims;
• reviewing the impact of the Asylum
Accommodation and Support Services
Contracts on housing need and public
services in all UK regions.
6. Backing our Farmers
and Food Security
The DUP recognises that farms and our rural
communities are an integral part of the social
and economic fabric of Northern Ireland.
We know that the challenges facing primary
producers can, at times, take their toll on
farm families, negatively impacting their
health and wellbeing. DUP MPs will fight to
ensure they receive the right support, and
the proper recognition, going forward.
Direct Farm Support
In the last term, the DUP team at
Westminster secured a guarantee from
the Government that the level of annual
support provided for direct farm payments
would be maintained at pre-2020 levels
for the duration of the Parliament. We are
committed to standing up for farmers and
their businesses once again.
DUP MPs will:
3 seek an increased, ring-fenced and multi-
annual farm support and development
budget. This must, at a minimum, ensure
that the annual level of funding provided
by the Treasury is increased to match the
impact of inflation - both in the period
since 2020 and on an ongoing basis;
3 highlight the need for long-term,
inflation-proof financial commitments to
agriculture - including beyond a single
parliamentary mandate - in order to
provide certainty for businesses and
industry
Food Security
The DUP believes food production should
be recognised as a strategic national
asset in the United Kingdom. The needs
of our farmers cannot be sacrificed in
favour of other policy objectives. Investing
in agriculture and primary production is
essential for boosting productivity, job
creation and delivering progress toward
environmental goals.
DUP MPs will:
3 pursue measures to make farm
businesses more profitable, productive
and resilient, as well as attractive to
the next generation, with a particular
focus on encouraging longer-term land
leasing and rental arrangements through
tax relief and by exploring alternative,
additional options to the current con-
acre system.
3 seek a national review of planning
policy and law to unlock greater levels
of on-farm investment for purposes of
growing and processing fruit, vegetables,
cultivating crops and improving animal
welfare. This should include ensuring
rules around permitted development and
ammonia emissions adopt a long-term
approach to delivering more sustainable
farming practices.
Trade
The DUP believes the UK should forge
international trade deals that benefit
agriculture in all parts of our nation. We
are clear that food should not be used
as a bargaining chip. There is a risk that
unfair and unworkable environment targets
levied on local farm businesses may lead to
the conditions, and reduction in livestock
numbers, that usher in a reliance on foreign,
cheaper produce farmed under conditions,
and to standards, that we would never
accept in the UK.
The DUP will seek protection for sensitive
food and animal products in trade
negotiations. We are also urging Ministers
to publish annual impact assessments of
free trade agreements impacting domestic
agriculture.
Promoting Local Produce
The DUP is in favour of setting ambitious
targets for the sourcing of local, high-
quality food. This should include a
commitment by the Government to source
50% of food into the public sector from
British farms.
Animal Welfare
DUP MPs have been united in support
for various animal welfare campaigns
and bills, including the banning of trophy
hunting imports, foie gras import ban,
and greater protections for puppies and
kittens against smuggling. Specifically, we
voted for stronger custodial sentencing
for animal cruelty in England and Wales,
bringing other parts of the UK into line with
the maximum five-year penalty in place in
Northern Ireland.
We will build on this record by:
3 taking forward provisions of the Kept
Animals Bill to tackle puppy smuggling
and livestock worrying;
3 promoting a new approach to tackling
increases in attacks by dogs;
3 continuing to argue that all animal
welfare legislation, including on the live
export of animals for slaughter, should be
decided by the elected representatives
of the people of Northern Ireland.
Fairness and Transparency
We will support policies that promote a
more transparent supply chain for agri-food.
This should include expanding the powers
of the Groceries Adjudicator to address
unfair practices and encouraging better
pricing for primary producers.
Bovine TB
The consequences of an outbreak of TB are
devastating for farm businesses, removing
hundreds of cattle per week from local
agriculture with lost production potential.
This also has debilitating effects on the
health and wellbeing of farm families.
DUP MPs will:
3 oppose any reduction in compensation
rates for cattle infected with bTB;
3 support robust bTB eradication policies
and programmes, including targeted
badger culling, with the aim moving to a
vaccination-only approach to tackling the
disease as soon as possible.
Fisheries and Coastal
Communities
Northern Ireland’s fishing fleet based
across Kilkeel, Portavogie and Ardglass is
the heartbeat of our coastal communities
and the DUP is committed to supporting
those working and living there to become
more prosperous, improve the marine
environment and build on their reputation
as suppliers of high-quality produce.
There is huge development potential
to grow and expand the sector to make
fishing operations more efficient, our
harbours more accessible and exploit
new opportunities flowing from green
growth and the blue economy. DUP MPs
will continue to press the Government for
investment in these important areas.
NI fishermen have benefited from leaving
the Common Fisheries Policy. It is right
that the discrimination that saw fishing
opportunities and quotas, for herring, for
example, effectively stolen from Northern
Ireland fishermen and awarded to their
competitors in the Irish Republic has ended.
However, they also deserve a fair allocation
of quota within the UK and the DUP will
continue to press for this.
The DUP also recognises that coastal
erosion is also a concern for many residents
and businesses and we will build on efforts
to date to enhance defences and put in
place alleviation schemes.
7.Leading a Fairer - Not
Faster - Path Towards
Net-Zero
The DUP supports the United Kingdom’s
long-term net zero ambitions and will
advocate for policy and initiatives that are
environmentally responsible and support
decarbonisation.
Although we appreciate that there is a
role for ambitious and flexible emissions
targets in driving forward progress, we
remain concerned that recent legislation,
including in Northern Ireland, has been
rushed, poorly drafted and conflicts with
independent scientific advice by the
Climate Change Committee.
Recognising NI’s Contribution
to Date
Northern Ireland has:
3 reduced greenhouse gas emissions
per capita by 36% since 1990 and by
51% per unit of electricity generated
since 2021;
3 45.4% of our electricity now comes from
renewables;
3 our dairy farmers have reduced their
green-house gas footprint by 37% for
each litre of milk produced since 1990.
A Fairer Transition
There is no question that more sustainable
policies in areas like energy, housing
and transport can bring benefits for the
standards of living enjoyed by people
in Northern Ireland and help to tackle
deprivation and isolation. However, many
of our citizens now perceive climate action
to mean higher taxes, increased costs for
basic goods and services and a residual
threat to jobs and livelihoods, particularly
in farming families. This comes as families
face the highest tax burden since the
Second World War.
The DUP will press for a truly fair transition
which is inclusive of all communities,
households and industries and addresses
the looming threat of further costs
threatened by changes to emissions trading
schemes and the impact of the EU Carbon
Border Adjustment Carbon Mechanism on
trade between GB and NI.
Protecting our Rivers and Lakes
Northern Ireland has a beautiful natural
environment and one that is envied across the
world. The DUP believes the crisis engulfing
our rivers and lakes cannot be ignored.
Our rivers systems are our precious
natural resource which sadly in some
cases are being turned into open sewers
ultimately resulting in the loss of this once
valuable resource.
There must be a concerted effort to tackle
the sources of pollution, protect habitats,
prevent biodiversity loss and preserve water
quality in both Lough Neagh and our rivers
throughout Northern Ireland.
DUP MPs will support:-
3 a multi-agency response, and approach,
to the ecological crisis in Lough Neagh;
3 targeted initiatives to prevent pollutants
entering our waterways;
3 enforcement action for those who
repeatedly or deliberately pollute our
rivers or lakes;
Green Growth
Progress toward net-zero cannot be treated
in isolation from an economic programme
focused on green, clean and inclusive
growth. We are committed to doubling the
size of Northern Ireland’s low carbon and
renewable energy economy to more than
£2bn turnover.
The NI Executive’s overarching Green
Growth Strategy and Delivery Framework
for Northern Ireland is aiming to transform
our society towards net zero by 2050,
protect and enhance our environment
and deliver sustainable economic growth.
It is undeniable that reducing emissions
will have very significant economic
opportunities for Northern Ireland. There
will be massive opportunities to exploit
emerging green technology across various
sectors, including energy, transport and
manufacturing.
We support the ambition of creating
more local green jobs in these sectors
and want to explore how Northern Ireland
businesses and projects with green and
clean ambitions can better tap into UK-wide
funding, supply chains and incentives.
Energy Security
The DUP remains committed to phasing out
fossil fuels. The Energy Strategy brought
forward by DUP Economy Ministers in the
Executive contain a range of ambitious
targets and policies to support the
transition to safe, affordable and clean
energy solutions in Northern Ireland.
We are clear that the status quo of
importing and consuming fossil fuels at
current levels is not sustainable. However,
two thirds of homes are still heated by
oil and in the interim, supplies of fossil
fuels - including North Sea oil - will still be
required unless we want our communities
to go without basic services.
The DUP wants to see a strategic national
approach to transforming the production of
clean and renewable energy in all parts of
the United Kingdom.
A National and Joined-Up
Approach
A national approach to co-design,
delivery and monitoring of climate policy
will be crucial in the next Parliament, as
will ensuring there is an approach to
enforcement that provides a level playing
field across the United Kingdom.
Petrol/Diesel Ban
Shifting public transport to alternative
energies and away from diesel has been
a DUP commitment for many years. This
is a core component of the Path to Net
Zero Energy Strategy delivered by DUP
Economy Ministers in the Executive and
we will lobby government to significantly
increase investment in, and availability of,
sustainable transport.
The DUP supports the decision to push
back a ban on new petrol and diesel
vehicles to at least 2035. We believe
there should be a further review of these
plans which takes account of the high
upfront costs facing families to transition
to electric vehicles, the practical impact
on businesses and productivity, and the
current postcode lottery of EV charging
infrastructure availability.
Active Travel
The DUP will support improved, structured
working between local, central and national
government to improve active travel
infrastructure, including through closely
aligned active travel tourism strategies.
Waste and Circular Economy
Ensuring waste is kept in the economy
and not in our landscape holds economic
benefits and can help promote a circular
economy. Businesses reprocessing paper,
plastics and glass from our households
employ hundreds of people in local
communities and add significant value
to our economy. There is scope to grow
and expand this sector by ensuring more
material of sufficient quality is available
within Northern Ireland.
In our view, that goal will not be achieved
by a costly move to require households to
sort their waste into as many as six bins.
The DUP supports a uniform method for
household waste collection in Northern
Ireland. We support keeping it simple to
collect the highest recycling volumes and
promote innovation in sorting technology.
This reduces cost for the taxpayer, drives
higher volumes in recycling and promotes
investment in the private sector.
In order to contribute to the 70% recycling
rate for all waste in Northern Ireland by
2030, DUP MPs will work with the next
Government to:
3 unlock funding for the circular economy
in Northern Ireland through the National
Interdisciplinary Circular Economy
Research (NICER) programme;
3 encourage more businesses to
adopt circular business models, with
appropriate support and building
on trailblazer firms such as Artemis
Technologies and Frylite locally;
3 promote sustainability in design of
goods, improve material efficiency and
reduce waste;
3 seek to reduce the annual material
footprint per person across the UK;
3 form clusters to raise awareness of
responsible practices and promote
best practice;
3 develop a circular economy monitoring
framework for all parts of the UK;
3 embed circular economy principles at all
levels of education.
8. Defending Our Most
Vulnerable
Pro-Life
The DUP is unashamedly pro-life and
continues to oppose the radical abortion
laws foisted on communities in Northern
Ireland. Since 2019, DUP MPs have:
3 opposed the commissioning of
abortion services in Northern Ireland
and legal instruction from the
Government to ringfence funding for
this from the block grant;
3 supported legal action by disability
campaigner Heidi Crowter against
legislation allowing the abortion of
babies with Down’s Syndrome up
until birth;
3 opposed regulations foisting abortion
on the Relationships and Sexuality
Education curriculum in schools across
Northern Ireland;
3 raised concerns regarding at-home
abortion pills and possible coercion of
women who take them without medical
advice or support.
DUP MPs will continue to support legislation
and policies that affirm the value and
dignity of all life.
We do not believe prayer, including silent
prayer, should be criminalised or regarded
as anti-social behaviour. We will seek a
review of Section 9 of the Public Order
Act 2023 and the impact of Public Space
Protection Orders on those who seek to
reasonably express their pro-life beliefs in
the public square.
Disabilities
The DUP is committed to ensuring those
with disabilities can live full and active lives.
We will continue to advocate for better
access to, and provision of, vital services
that can help ensure they can play a
stronger role in their local communities and
the labour market.
DUP MPs will:
3 support a wide-ranging audit of central
and local government facilities to
ensure they are accessible to those
with disabilities;
3 work with the Inclusive Mobility and
Transport Advisory Committee (IMTAC) in
future transport projects;
3 promote close collaboration between
IMTAC, the Disabled Persons Transport
Advisory Committee (DPTAC) in England
and Wales and Mobility and Access
Committee for Scotland;
3 support the introduction of further
resident parking zone schemes;
3 encourage government departments,
public bodies and local authorities across
the UK to join Access Able or require
them to provide comparable information
on disability access and services;
3 invest more in community transport,
including services that provide a lifeline
to older people.
9. Investing More in
National Infrastructure
Delivering high quality infrastructure will
be the foundation of future growth across
the United Kingdom. The DUP not only
has a strong record of improving links
between Great Britain and Northern Ireland
but a clear vision for better connectivity
nationally, throughout the British Isles and
with the rest of the world.
Union Connectivity Review
Since the 1950s, the Northern Ireland
rail network has been cut by some 450
miles and there has been historical
underinvestment compared to other regions
of the United Kingdom. We do not have any
railway electrification currently and there
are clear disparities in access to services in
specific areas, such as the North West.
The Union Connectivity Review
recommended that the Government support
the Executive in developing, funding and
implementing a long-term pipeline of
improvements to transport infrastructure.
Although progress to date has been
modest, the Government has provided:
3 £3.3 million to Translink to deliver a
study on the cost, feasibility and value
for money of electrification of the railway
in Northern Ireland from Belfast to the
border with the Irish Republic;
3 £700,000 for a feasibility study on
reopening the Antrim-Lisburn railway
line, with an additional stop at Belfast
International Airport;
3 £800,000 to deliver a feasibility study
on reinstating the Portadown to Armagh
railway line.
This funding is extremely welcome,
however the full realisation of these projects
for the social and economic benefit of all
communities in Northern Ireland require
a step change from UK Ministers, both in
terms of resourcing and project expertise
with local departments and stakeholders.
A strengthened National Infrastructure
Commission, with increased regional
representation and fairer access to its skills
and expertise for Northern Ireland, can
play a key role in achieving the conditions
necessary to scale-up and deliver NI’s
infrastructure ambitions. Hosting a major
infrastructure conference in Northern
Ireland would also be a signal of the
Government’s overriding commitment
to strengthening connections and
relationships between our four nations.
DUP MPs will pursue the full
implementation of the Union Connectivity
Review. We will also work closely with
the Treasury to maximise the benefits of
Financial Transactions Capital and better
access to the UK Infrastructure Bank in
order to turbocharge major infrastructure
plans locally.
We will never apologise for prioritising
improvements to connectivity to our single
largest trade market in Great Britain. As part
of our negotiations with the Government,
we secured commitments to:
3 improving journeys on the A75 between
Gretna and Stranraer, following
the recommendations in the Union
Connectivity Review, to alleviate pinch
points on the road; providing better links
between the Cairnryan ferry terminals
serving Northern Ireland and southwest
Scotland, connecting with the M6 and
Cumbria, and the A77 towards Glasgow;
3 boosting port connections and
infrastructure between NI and GB,
including through £10m for infrastructure
development.
These commitments are a practical
demonstration of the importance of
ensuring businesses and consumers in
all regions can grasp the full economic
potential and opportunity arising from
membership of the United Kingdom.
The DUP believe there is no contradiction
between our Pro-Union stance and support
for growth-oriented and mutually beneficial
expansion of transport links between
Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic.
There are clear synergies between the
All-Island Rail Review and the Union
Connectivity Review and the latter
recommended that the Government
provide funding and major project
expertise for the purposes of delivering
specific recommendations for cross-border
rail. We will work with the Government to
take forward this workstream in a way that
promotes growth, jobs, housing and social
cohesion for communities in Northern
Ireland and right across the UK.
Air Connectivity
The DUP is committed to strengthening
Northern Ireland’s air connectivity with
Great Britain and internationally.
Our MPs have also campaigned
extensively for a solution which allows the
reinstatement of duty-free shopping for
flights between NI and the EU. Preventing
airports and businesses in Northern Ireland
from accessing this revenue stream - which
can account for as much as 40% of an
airport’s revenue - is unfair and places
them at a competitive disadvantage to the
rest of the UK.
DUP MPs will work the Government and
at Stormont to design and deliver a new
scheme to secure new and direct routes
to Northern Ireland from European,
transatlantic and Middle Eastern countries.
Delivering an attractive proposition to
airlines on a sustainable basis will be crucial
to securing more inward investment and
inbound tourists, which will in turn provide
a catalyst for jobs and prosperity in every
corner of Northern Ireland.
Domestically, we continue to advocate for
a more strategic approach to boosting
regional linkages, including through
ensuring updated plans for a potential
third runway at Heathrow prioritise regional
interconnection and provide opportunities
for the construction industry in all parts of
the United Kingdom.
In Parliament we will continue to advocate
for the abolition of domestic air passenger
duty, which disproportionately impacts
competitiveness of our airports. A 50% cut
is a welcome start but the next Government
should do more to level up the regulatory
environment for air routes and tourism in all
parts of the UK.
Shared Rural Network
The DUP believes the benefits of the
Shared Rural Network initiative between
the Government and four leading mobile
network operators - EE, Three VMO2 and
Vodafone - must extend to all areas of
Northern Ireland.
The SRN aims to ensure the provision of
high-quality 4G mobile coverage and at
present 82% of areas in Northern Ireland
has coverage by all four operators.
However, in many areas, that figure is much
lower and further investment in upgrading
the mobile network and investing in masts
has been put on hold due to major delays
in the planning process. This could lead
to millions of pounds of lost investment,
leaving rural infrastructure in some of our
most hard-to-reach areas behind.
DUP MPs will work with Government,
networks and local ministers to find an
urgent solution to this issue.
5G Roll-Out
The DUP spearheaded the provision of full-
fibre broadband across Northern Ireland,
securing £150 million for this project
in 2017 and ensuring its roll-out will be
completed by the end of 2025.
Building on this record of making
Northern Ireland the best-connected
region in Europe, we will work with the
Government to ensure communities in
Northern Ireland benefit from further
capacity, such as gigabit-capable
broadband, whilst seeking to accelerate
the roll-out of 5G coverage.
Public Land Register
The DUP would campaign to establish a
national database of public land. A major
benefit of this would be to ensure smaller
businesses in the construction industry can
identify future projects earlier.
10. Standing Up for
Victims of Crime
Online Harm
The DUP will campaign to end the ‘Wild
West’ of social media and to protect
children and all internet users from harm,
abuse and misinformation online. Our MPs
supported key aspects of the Online Safety
Act, including:
3 age verification for social media and
pornography sites;
3 risk assessments by social media
platforms;
3 new duties on platforms to remove illegal
and harmful content and prevent it being
shared;
3 new criminal offences for encouraging
self-harm, trolling, cyber-flashing and
targeting people with epilepsy online
with harmful content;
3 sanctions and fines for social media
platforms.
While we are clear that freedom of
speech must be protected, and that what
is legal offline must also be legal online,
there is much more to do to build safer
online communities.
We will:
3 campaign to ensure that smaller and
emerging social media platforms and
sites hosting potential harmful content
are subject to regulatory controls and
Ofcom oversight;
3 oppose a lower minimum age for social
media use, recognising that:
• it is wrong to penalise children and
young people for the failures of
platforms;
• it could dilute focus on more proactive
regulation by big tech companies;
• social media remains a key tool for
children to socialise and learn;
• it would likely displace risk to other
settings, including gaming platforms;
3 promote strategies to reduce the risks of
end-to-end encryption for children and
young people online;
3 consider the merits of a duty of candour
for social media firms;
3 seek a better alignment of Ofcom’s
responsibilities to target and monitor
reductions in harm online;
3 support a rapid review of emerging risks
from AI, including chatbots;
3 work to support progress on stronger
rights for bereaved parents in
accessing their child’s social media
profiles and data;
3 support ring-fencing receipts from fines
levied on social media companies as part
of the Online Safety Act for online harm
prevention and reduction;
3 identify policies to address gaps in
existing regulation of online services,
including harmful content hosted on
app stores;
3 agree a statutory definition of grooming.
A Voice for Victims
The 1998 Belfast Agreement resulted
in the early release of terrorists and
ensured that anyone later convicted of a
Troubles-related offence would serve a
maximum of two years in prison. Letters of
Comfort were later provided to on-the-run
suspects. This erosion of the rule of law
was never justified.
Two decades later, it is still unacceptable.
The Government’s decision to grant
an amnesty in all but name to those
responsible for wrongdoing under the
Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and
Reconciliation) Act would extinguish the
flame of justice for many innocent victims.
The DUP will support efforts to repeal this
legislation as well as resist attempts to
rewrite the past.
Since 2007, the DUP has:
3 delivered on our policy of a Troubles
victims’ pension, ensuring not a single
penny is handed to perpetrators;
3 overseen a fundamental reform of victim
support services;
3 created a Victims Commission and
Victims Forum;
3 secured the appointment of a Victims
Commissioner;
3 quadrupled the level of funding
provided to victims and survivors under
Direct Rule;
3 ensured the needs of victims who are not
part of advocacy organisations are also
addressed;
3 introduced a Private Member’s Bill in the
House of Commons to provide a UK-
wide definition of a victim which excludes
those killed by their own hand;
3 guaranteed the full implementation of
Armed Forces Covenant in Northern
Ireland;
3 appointed a Veterans Commissioner;
3 established a Victims’ Charter to
prioritise the needs of victims within our
criminal justice system and set minimum
standards for support;
3 pressed for compensation for victims of
IRA weapons supplied by the Gaddafi
regime in Libya;
3 ensured memorials to murdered police
officers are not placed out of sight in
PSNI stations;
3 raised alleged Irish Government
collusion in IRA atrocities.
In the last mandate, DUP MPs:
3 vociferously opposed the Northern
Ireland Troubles (Legacy and
Reconciliation) Act 2023;
3 ensured no Troubles-era offender could
gain immunity from prosecution for
sexual offences;
3 proposed a new and bespoke criminal
offence of glorifying terrorism;
3 sought legal protection against recipients
of Government amnesty profiting from
activities linked to their offending,
including criminal memoirs, or contacting
victims or their families;
3 delivered the Troubles pension for
innocent victims, securing a commitment
in law that victim-makers will not receive
a single penny;
3 supported the Omagh families’ call, and
the High Court’s recommendation, for a
public inquiry;
3 tabled a debate in Parliament on the
findings of the inquest into the Kingsmill
Massacre;
We will:
3 support innocent victims in robustly
challenging the Government’s amnesty
legislation in the courts;
3 urge UK Ministers to repeal the
Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and
Reconciliation) Act within the first 100
days of the next Parliament;
3 prioritise a victim-centred and victim-led
approach to investigating the past
3 guarantee continued funding for the
Troubles victims’ pension and seek to
expedite the application process;
3 continue to direct substantial funding
to the Victims and Survivors Service and
work of Veterans Commissioner;
3 pursue a UK-wide definition of a victim
which rejects any equivalence between
the perpetrator and the victim;
3 resist attempts by republicans and
elements of the media to justify terrorist
campaigns;
3 seek to prevent human rights legislation
being exploited to rewrite the past;
3 explore the potential to define collusion
in legislation to address sweeping and
call for a full investigation by the Irish
Government into allegations of collusion
between the Garda and the IRA;
3 press for further progress by the
Omagh Public Inquiry following the
announcement of the Terms of Reference
in February 2024;
3 challenge the Irish Government
to launch a public inquiry into the
Omagh atrocity;
3 ensure paramilitaries and organised
crime gangs are pursued by all legal
means and put out of business;
3 seek to establish an oral and video
archive for victims and survivors of the
Troubles which incorporates the stories
of first responders;
3 increase transparency in out-of-court
settlements agreed by the MoD and PSNI
in legacy cases.
Crime and Policing
The DUP believes that when it comes to
tackling increasingly sophisticated and
harmful forms of crime and breaking the
cycle of harm and control exerted by
criminal and paramilitary gangs, there
can be no substitute for a fully staffed and
properly resourced police service.
In Northern Ireland those efforts have not
only been frustrated, but undermined, by
a steady decline in policing budgets. In
more than a decade, there has been a 3%
growth in the policing and justice budget
compared to 70% and 45% for health and
education respectively, and the recruitment
of tens of thousands of additional officers
in England and Wales has not been
replicated here.
The Treasury needs to accept that this
is about more than how an Executive
slices the cake – the cake simply is not big
enough. The most visible symptom of this
rising crisis is the loss of police officers. A
recent independent review commissioned
by the Chief Constable concluded that had
police resources kept pace with England,
Scotland and Wales in recent years the
PSNI would presently have over 8,000
officers. Instead, we have 6,400. That is
not a sustainable position for any public
body, let alone an organisation tasked
with investigating crime, fighting terrorism
and keeping our communities safe. The
outworking, of course, is slower response,
a reduced neighbourhood presence and
fewer detectives.
It is imperative that the next Government
prioritises the safety of its citizens in all
parts of the United Kingdom through a
fiscal framework and funding model that is
fair and meets the needs of police service,
courts and wider criminal justice system.
DUP MPs will:
3 press for uplifts in Government funding
for Northern Ireland’s Additional
Security needs and the Tackling
Paramilitarism Programme;
3 seek a statutory definition of Child
Criminal Exploitation (CCE) to better
target paramilitaries and crime gangs
who prey on children and young people;
3 seek to resist the further erosion of stop
and search powers;
3 campaign to strengthen the role of the
National Crime Agency in NI;
3 support national strategies to reduce
high demand for police services that
could and should be routinely dealt with
by the health service;
3 seek to protect neighbourhood
policing resources;
3 ensure the design of national police
command courses reflect Northern
Ireland’s policing requirements and
encourage strong representation by
PSNI officers;
3 campaign to enhance resources for
occupational health and wellbeing
services within policing;
3 support tough measures to address
all forms of elder abuse, including
financial crime.
Violence Against Women & Girls
DUP MPs will:
3 seek to address gaps in funding for
specialist support for survivors of
domestic abuse;
3 support robust and up-to-date vetting in
police forces across the UK;
3 seek an improved response to trolling
and other forms of technology-facilitated
abuse against women online;
3 promote a review of arrangements
governing the disclosure of victims’
personal information in sexual and
domestic abuse cases;
3 call on the Government to review the
‘No Recourse to Public Funds’ (NRPF) for
migrants who suffer domestic abuse and
are at risk;
3 seek a review by DWP of the
requirement for those experiencing
domestic abuse to apply for split
payments of certain benefits.
Justice and the Courts
DUP MPs will support:
3 establishing a Royal Commission into
the effectiveness of the criminal justice
system across the UK;
3 pressing for stronger custodial sentences
for murder and terror offences in NI,
bringing NI into line with other regions;
3 seeking to try terrorism cases faster,
reducing the cost to our prison budgets
from suspects spending months, even
years, on remand;
3 investing in community-based initiatives
and diversionary programmes aimed at
addressing the root causes of crime;
3 increasing funding for speech and
language and mental health support
services within the criminal justice
system, including prison service;
3 promoting tougher sentencing for
physical assaults on retail staff;
3 reviewing how the criminal justice system
deals with peer-on-peer and teenage
relationship abuse.