Change
Labour Party Manifesto 2024

3Change Labour Party Manifesto 2024
My plan for change
This election is about change.
A chance to stop the endless Conservative chaos that
has directly harmed the finances of every family in
Britain.
A moment where we can turn the page on a set of
ideas that, over 14 years, have consistently left us more
vulnerable in an increasingly volatile world.
And an opportunity to begin the work of national
renewal. A rebuilding of our country, so that it once
again serves the interests of working people.
Restore hope
Every great nation is held together by shared beliefs. To
outsiders they may not seem exceptional or distinctive,
but they are essential for a sense of collective national
purpose. Britain is no different, but at this moment two of
our most important beliefs are in grave danger.
First, that politics should be driven by a sense of service to
the country, not considerations of party or self-interest.
Second, that if you work hard then - whoever you are,
wherever you started in life - Britain is a country that will
respect your contribution and give you a fair chance to
get on.
4Change Labour Party Manifesto 2024
When I consider these beliefs, it is hard not to think back
to my childhood. Then, as now, Britain’s place in the
world was uncertain. Then, as now, our economy was
gripped by stuttering growth and a cost-of-living crisis
that hurt working people.
Yet back then, there was at least a degree of security
in being able to take those two fundamental beliefs for
granted. For families like mine, this was a comfort. The
knowledge that Britain would offer your children a better
future gave us hope. A hope that may not sound high-
minded or particularly idealistic, but which families like
mine could build a life around.
Stop the chaos
To restore this hope, we must first end the Conservative
chaos. The visible decline in our communities –people
waiting on trolleys in A&E; families weighed down by
soaring mortgages; sewage in our rivers – is not an
accident. Rather, it is a direct result of a governing
party that, time and again, puts its own interests and
obsessions above the issues that affect families.
The result is a vicious cycle – decline feeding off chaos,
chaos feeding off decline – that will continue if they
return for five more years. Only a Labour government
can break this cycle and stop the chaos.
5Change Labour Party Manifesto 2024
Turn the page
We must turn the page decisively on the Conservative
ideas that have caused the chaos.
The world has become increasingly volatile, with a major
war in Europe for the first time in a generation and ever
greater threats to the living standards of working people.
This ‘age of insecurity’ requires the government to step
up, not stand aside.