PAGE
1
RESTORE
THE UNION
THE REALITY:
Our union with GB has been splintered by the Protocol
OUR MISSION:
The reunification of the UK
T U V M A N I F E S T O 2 0 2 4
CONTENTS
> Foreword by William Ross, Party President
> Personal message from Jim Allister KC MLA
> Impacting on national politics
> Dire consequences of the Protocol
> The Protocol is a dynamo for Irish unity
> Who divided Unionism?
> The importance of maintaining the Unionist vote share
> Immigration
> The economy – business
> The economy - personal
> Cost of living crisis
> Suitable housing for all
> Fair funding deal for Northern Ireland
> Foreign affairs and defence
> Stormont reform and the case for British rule
> Health
> Education
> Childcare
> Agriculture
> Policing and justice
> Innocent victims
> Valuing our senior citizens
> Life and family
> Fundamental freedoms
> Protecting women’s rights
> Making tourism about Northern Ireland again
> Sport
PAGE
1
FOREWORD
As we elect a new Parliament there is no escaping the constitutional
affront that Westminster is no longer sovereign over this part of the
Kingdom, because of the appalling surrender of powers to a foreign
parliament.
To anyone who cares about the Union, this is the core issue. TUV has
told you the truth about the iniquitous Protocol from the beginning.
While others have faltered and preferred the baubles of office, TUV
has spoken with strength, not weakness.
It is such strength that unionism needs like never before.
So, across the Province, I urge you to vote TUV - No Sea Border.
William Ross
TUV President
PAGE
2
PERSONAL MESSAGE
FROM JIM ALLISTER
This election is overshadowed by the greatest constitutional crisis Northern
Ireland has ever faced. Our nation is partitioned by a border in the Irish Sea and
unaccountable rule from Brussels dictates many aspects of our lives.
Remarkably, while the rest of the UK is electing MPs to make the laws which
govern them, we in Northern Ireland have no say in over 300 areas of law. Those
are decided by the EU, where we have no input.
Sadly, the unity once enjoyed across Unionism has been shattered by those who
broke their word to you and obtained votes dishonestly in the council elections
and indeed Assembly elections when they told you they were opposed to the
Sea Border.
At the beginning of the year, the DUP claimed that the Sea Border was gone.
“Zero checks, zero paperwork” was the infamous boast of Jeffery Donaldson
with Gavin Robinson standing beside him in support. Now, faced with an
election, the tune has changed.
Those who admit they lied to you in February do not deserve your vote in July.
Truth, honesty and integrity still matter in politics.
You can make that clear on 4th July by voting TUV - No Sea Border.
Jim Allister KC MLA
TUV Leader
PAGE
3
IMPACTING ON
NATIONAL POLITICS
In this election, TUV - No Sea Border is offering the people of Northern Ireland
the opportunity to vote for truly national politics.
We are campaigning with a common platform with Reform UK meaning the
parties have agreed the following:
Reform UK and TUV Memorandum of Understanding
It is hereby agreed that for the purpose of the upcoming General Election
Reform UK and TUV shall cooperate in providing and mutually supporting
candidates in Northern Ireland on the basis of the following common platform:
• upholding and strengthening the Union between Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, including the full restoration of Art 6 of the Act(s) of Union;
• equal rights for all citizens within the United Kingdom;
• rejection of the Irish Sea border and the subjection of Northern Ireland to
EU law and the ECJ;
• the completion of a full Brexit so that the United Kingdom in all its parts
enjoys full independence and economic freedom;
• robust immigration system and controls;
• a taxation system, both personal and commercial, which rewards effort.
In all other matters the two parties may develop and advance their own
policies in accordance with their ideological outlook.
PAGE
4
Any MPs elected will operate in pursuit of this agreement under a common
Whip.
Moreover, going forward, Reform UK and TUV will collaborate in joint political
ventures with a view to advancing our shared vision of strengthening the links
and political integration of all parts of the United Kingdom. An inclusive rather
than disparate United Kingdom is our goal.
Dated 16th March 2024.
This agreement has put the Sea Border, which many seek to suggest is a settled
matter, right at the heart of this election campaign. It commits what is now the
second largest party in polling UK wide to restore Northern Ireland’s place as a
full and equal part of the nation, the removal of the Sea Border and the
completion of a Brexit from which the whole of the UK benefits.
For far too long Unionism has been parochial and detached from the politics of
the entire nation. The historic link up between TUV and Reform UK changes
that.
PAGE
5
DIRE CONSEQUENCES OF
THE PROTOCOL
The Protocol, which denied Northern Ireland the Brexit enjoyed by GB, has the
most far reaching consequences, both constitutionally and economically. It
makes this part of the UK an adjunct of the EU, ruled in significant part by its
foreign laws and court.
Constitutionally, NI is now a condominium - ruled in part by UK laws and in part
by foreign EU laws. This has splintered our Union with GB. The reunification of
the United Kingdom and our place within it is our overriding mission.
1. The Great Vote Robbery: the disenfranchisement of 1.9 million people
The Northern Ireland Protocol/Windsor Framework subjects us to government
by a foreign parliament, unelected by us and unaccountable to us, in 300 areas
of law. This is extraordinary. Up until this point the flow of history has been very
much about extending democracy. We are not aware of any other country being
fully enfranchised for a hundred years only to then be subject to the indignity of
having their vote removed in 300 areas of law.
Having our votes taken in this manner has profound practical consequences. For
example, the EU is currently proposing to ban the use of amalgam in dental
fillings from 1 January 2025. If the ban proceeds in NI, the British Dental
Association has said that NHS Dental services are likely to become unsustainable
in NI, even as they continue in GB, because current NHS funding barely covers
the cost of amalgam procedures, and the alternatives are much more expensive.
It is absurd that a foreign Parliament should make any of our laws, but that they
should consider imposing on us legislation that places an aspect of one of our
great national institutions - the NHS - in jeopardy, is completely intolerable.
Even if you have not yet been negatively affected by legislation made for us by
people unaccountable to us, it is only a matter of time before you will. This is
not acceptable in 2024.
2. Losing our economy: cut off from the UK Single Market for goods
It is prioritising the protection of the integrity of the EU’s Single Market that has
caused the imposition of the Irish Sea Border as a Customs and SPS (Sanitary
and Phyto-Sanitary) border.
PAGE
6
Until 1 January 2021, Northern Ireland was a fully integrated part of the UK
economy. We benefited from being part of this economy of nearly 70 million
people, fully integrated in its larger supply chains and from the impact of their
economies of scale on prices.
The far greater diversity of goods movements within a fully integrated economy
means that imposition of a customs and SPS border across such an economy
necessitates a huge increase in the amount of customs and SPS paperwork with
the cost of generating such making trade uneconomic. This necessitates the
restructuring of supply chains either side of the new border, replacing what was
previously one integrated economy with two separate economies and
promoting alignment of Northern Ireland with the Republic.
Failed Solutions:
i) The Windsor Framework – saving the Irish Sea Border
If the Protocol had been fully applied on 1 January 2021 it would have caused
Northern Ireland’s supply chain to collapse within 48 hours, creating a political
crisis that would have completely invalidated the Protocol as a viable political
project. This was averted by two provisions that have perpetuated the Irish Sea
border: first the immediate application of grace periods and second, the
Windsor Framework through the creation of the Green Lane, and making its
implementation gradual.
The implementation of the Windsor Framework comes in three stages,
• First, on 1 October 2023, when the Green Lane SPS border was introduced,
• Second, on 1 October 2024 when the Green Lane customs border provisions
will be applied and
• Third, on 1 July 2025 by which date the Border Controls Posts are supposed to
have been completed to enforce the changes.
The problem with this is that the disenfranchisement of the people of NI
remains, that the Red Lane remains, subjecting goods to the most demanding
customs and SPS border requirements, and while offering a less demanding
border experience, the Green Lane still involves the imposition of a customs and
international SPA border as if trading with a foreign country, because of our
subjection to the EU’s Customs Code.
PAGE
7
ii) Safeguarding the Union – The Donaldson-Robinson Deal
Although the DUP claimed earlier in the year that their Safeguarding the Union
deal provided a significant advance on the Windsor Framework (which they
rejected) and that their new deal should be embraced, this was based on what
can only be regarded as a sleight of hand. They stated repeatedly in Parliament,
and to the media, ‘the Green Lane has gone’, implying that the Donaldson deal
largely removed the border in the Irish Sea, the Green Lane having accounted
for over 80% of goods crossing to NI. In truth, however, they later confirmed
that rather than going, it was being replaced with the UK Internal Market
System. This created a huge problem because the UK Internal Market System is
just another name for the Green Lane, so no changes have taken place in
relation to the Green Lane whatsoever.
The Solution:
i) Mutual Enforcement
There is a means of protecting the integrity of the EU single market that avoids
a hard border across the island of Ireland and does not involve disenfranchising
a single person. Developed from within the EU, Mutual Enforcement provides a
means of managing the border that involves the UK requiring, through its own
legislation, that goods made in the UK for consumption in the Republic of
Ireland must be built to Republic of Ireland standards, and the Republic
requiring, through its legislation, that goods made in the Republic for sale in the
UK must be made to UK standards.
The DUP effectively rejected expert offers of help in relation to this option and
in so doing threw away the leverage at their disposal in demanding it, namely
that in a context where the EU has two means of managing the border, one of
which involves disenfranchising 1.9 million people, and the other of which does
not involve disenfranchising anyone, that the former is unthinkable.
Democracy is a non-negotiable standard of civility and must be respected. TUV
Reform MPs would make this case relentlessly such that if the EU is to preserve
its reputation as an adherent to democracy it will have to recognise that the
current arrangement is politically unsustainable.
ii) The restoration of consent and cross community consent
The DUP foolishly agreed to go back into Stormont without insisting on the
restoration of the basic principles of cross community consent as it affects the
Protocol.
PAGE
8
The removal of the need for cross-community assent to the Protocol in the
upcoming vote on the matter is a particularly egregious assault on both
unionism and the supposed equilibrium of the Stormont modus operandi. For
decades majoritarianism has been depicted as the ultimate scourge of misrule,
but, now, when it suits, it is the needs must device to retain the Protocol and
secures its subjugation of Northern Ireland’s place in the United Kingdom.
Hence, Stormont as a protector of equal treatment, never mind the unionist
position, is evidently meaningless.
TUV Reform UK will highlight how these key protections undergirding
devolution have been removed, something no one else is talking about, and
make the case relentlessly that they must be restored if devolution is to have a
secure future in Northern Ireland.
We welcome Reform UK’s manifesto commitment, reproduced here:
Abandon the Windsor Framework
This is worse than the original Northern Ireland Protocol. The UK has been
partitioned down the Irish Sea. Northern Ireland is still in the EU’s single
market for goods. It is unacceptable that British citizens in Northern Ireland
are being ruled by EU laws.
THE PROTOCOL IS A
DYNAMO FOR IRISH UNITY
No unionist should underestimate the centrality of the Protocol to the Irish unity
project.
The fact that 300 areas of law have been removed from UK to Republic of
Ireland/EU control is a vivid illustration of how an all-Ireland is being established
through dynamic economic alignment with the Republic. The laws in these 300
key areas, which includes our agri-food, goods and trade economy, are now
identical north and south, courtesy of the Union- dismantling Protocol.
It is through economic fusion that an all-Ireland is to be built. With a Sinn Fein
minister now driving that agenda as Economy minister, Stormont is a critical
cog in the wheel.
Far from diminishing the direction of travel the DUP’s return to Stormont and its
dud Donaldson Deal has provided momentum for the process.
Hence, the importance of unionists on 4th July rebelling against this folly.
PAGE
9
WHO DIVIDED UNIONISM?
Some who recognise their credibility with the Unionist electorate is shot, are
resorting to calling TUV vote splitters. But let’s consider the facts.
TUV offered a deal to keep Unionism united. Our suggestion would have seen
single pro Union candidates in each of Northern Ireland’s 18 seats. This was
dismissed out of hand by the DUP and no one was more dismissive of the idea
than the current DUP leader.
Remember, too, that on Ulster Day 2021, all Unionist leaders gave their solemn
promise to you that it was our “unalterable position that the Protocol must be
rejected and replaced by arrangements which fully respect Northern Ireland’s
position as a constituent and integral part of the United Kingdom”.
TUV remains true to that promise. Others binned it once elections were out of
the way. That being the case, how much faith can you put in their promises in
this election?
Those who have somersaulted to be Protocol implementers have divided union-
ism. Vote for the candidate of a party of Protocol implementers, and that is
exactly what you’ll get!
Alone among the Unionist parties in this election, TUV is publishing the full text
of the 2021 Ulster Day Declaration in our manifesto and renewing our pledge to
the people that we remain true to it.
PAGE
10
Unionist Declaration on the Northern Ireland Protocol.
“We, the undersigned Unionist Political Leaders, affirm our opposition to the
Northern Ireland Protocol, its mechanisms and structures and reaffirm our
unalterable position that the Protocol must be rejected and replaced by
arrangements which fully respect Northern Ireland’s position as a constituent
and integral part of the United Kingdom.”
Sir Jeffrey Donaldson MP DUP Leader
Doug Beattie MC MLA UUP Leader
Jim Allister MLA TUV Leader
Cllr Billy Hutchinson PUP Leader
THE IMPORTANCE OF
MAINTAINING THE
UNIONIST VOTE SHARE
After this election one of the important statistics which will be considered is the
total Unionist vote. Some – for their own selfish reasons – arrogantly claim that
they alone have the right to contest elections and only a vote for them counts.
Such talk plays into the hands of the enemies of the Union. By ensuring that the
vast majority of Unionists have the opportunity to vote against the Protocol,
TUV is ensuring that the pro-Union vote is maximised.
The reality is that if TUV were not on the ballot paper, tens of thousands of
Unionists simply would not vote because they would have no one who
represented their views.
Far from damaging Unionism, TUV – No Sea Border candidates ensure that the
Unionist vote share increases.
PAGE
11
IMMIGRATION
On 13th May this year in our High Court, there was a judgement of immense
constitutional significance. It ruled that the UK Government’s Rwanda Bill could
not apply in Northern Ireland.
This was constitutionally significant in that an Act of the sovereign Parliament of
the United Kingdom was overruled and set aside because of the supremacy of
EU law, which is bestowed by Article 2 of the sovereignty-grabbing Protocol,
subjecting Northern Ireland alone in the United Kingdom to its supremacy, its
laws and its rights.
The consequence, of course, given the subject, is that Northern Ireland will now
become a magnet for illegal migrants, flooding into Northern Ireland to escape
the potential consequences that lie within the Rwanda scheme.
Thanks to the pressure from Reform UK, it is probable that the next Government
will, whether it likes to or not, be forced to introduce tougher measures to curb
immigration. However, for as long as the Sea Border remains Northern Ireland
will not be covered by these measures.
Significantly, the DUP's 'Safeguarding the Union' contains a blatant lie in
paragraph 46, where it states:
"The Windsor Framework applies only in respect of the trade in goods".
TUV told the people that that was not so, and now the High Court equally says
that it is not so.
A vote for TUV in this election is a vote for a robust migration policy across the
whole of the UK.
We agree with the position of Reform UK in their Manifesto, reproduced
below:
Uncontrolled mass immigration has pushed the UK to breaking point. Reform
UK will secure Britain’s borders to protect wages, our public services, and
British culture and values.
• Freeze Non-Essential Immigration.
Strict limits on immigration are the only way to relieve the pressure on our
housing, public services, increase wages and protect our culture, identity and
values. Essential skills, mainly around healthcare, must be the only exception.
PAGE
12
• Stop the Boats with our 4 Point Plan.
- Leave the European Convention on Human Rights.
- Zero illegal immigrants to be resettled in the UK. New Department of
Immigration.
- Pick up illegal migrants out of boats and take them back to France.
- Secure Detention for all illegal migrants
• Secure Detention for all Asylum Seekers.
All asylum seekers that arrive illegally from safe countries will be processed
rapidly, offshore if necessary. Those entering from a safe country will also be
barred from claiming asylum or citizenship. No legal aid for non-citizens.
Those rejected will be returned.
• Immediate Deportation for Foreign Criminals.
Deport foreign nationals immediately after their prison sentence ends. With-
draw citizenship from immigrants who commit crime with the exception of
some misdemeanour offences.
• Bar Student Dependents.
Introduce new visa rules for international students that bar dependents. Only
international students with essential skills can remain in the UK. Close down
fake courses and immigration schemes that abuse the rules.
• Stop Health Tourism and Immediate Access to Benefits
We will impose a requirement of 5 years residency and employment to claim
any benefits in the UK.
• Employer Immigration Tax
The National Insurance rate will be raised to 20% for foreign workers. This
would incentivise businesses to employ British citizens whose National
Insurance rate would stay at 13.8%. Essential foreign health and care workers
would be exempt from the tax, as would businesses who employ 5 staff
members and under. This would boost wages and could raise more than £20
billion over five years to pay for apprenticeships and training for young British
people.
PAGE
13
THE ECONOMY – PERSONAL
TUV shares the Reform UK approach to our economy. We quote from their 2024
Manifesto:
Reform UK will make work pay and help the unemployed to escape the
benefits trap.
• Make Work Pay. Lift the Income Tax Start Point to £20,000 Per Year.
This frees up to 7 million people from paying Income Tax and saves every
worker almost £1,500 per year. Basic Tax rate stays at 20%. The higher rate
should begin at £70,000.
• Cut Energy Taxes, Beat the Cost-of-Living Crisis
Save households over £500 per year. Lower fuel duty by 20p per litre for both
residential and business users. Scrap VAT on energy bills. Scrap environmental
levies.
• Cut Residential Stamp Duty
Substantially boost economic activity and housebuilding by cutting Stamp
Duty to 0% below £750k. Cut it to 2% from £750k - £1.5m and cut it to 4% over
£1.5m.
• Abolish the VAT Tourist Tax
The government has cost our economy over £10 billion when they stopped the
VAT refund scheme for tourist shopping. This also deterred up to 2 million
tourists.
THE ECONOMY – BUSINESS
Reform UK will back risk takers and wealth creators and make sure that Britain
is open for business.
• Free Over 1.2 Million Small and Medium Sized Businesses from Corporation
Tax
Raise the minimum profit threshold to £100k. Reduce the main Corporation Tax
Rate from 25% to 20%, then to 15% from Year 3.
PAGE
14
• Abolish IR35 Rules to Support Sole Traders
Britain’s self-employed often work longer hours and take more risks. Many have
no pension and receive no sick pay.
• Raise the VAT Threshold to £150,000
Free up small entrepreneurs from red tape.
• Support Small and Medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs)
Abolish Business Rates for high street based SMEs. Offset this with Online
Delivery Tax at 4% for large, multinational enterprises to create a fairer playing
field for high streets. Cut entrepreneurs’ tax to 5%.
• Reform the Planning System
Fast-track new housing on brownfield sites and infrastructure projects to boost
businesses.
• Slash Red Tape to Boost Industry and Exports
Scrap thousands of laws that hold back British business and damage
productivity.
• Reform the Tax System
Major simplification is needed. At over 21,000 pages, the UK’s tax code is a
burden. Hong Kong’s tax code is under 500 pages.
PAGE
15
COST OF LIVING CRISIS
Across the UK the cost of living crisis continues, making life tough for everyone.
Now, more than ever, people demand prudence from government when it
comes to spending. They need MPs committed to smaller government knowing
that this will keep
taxation down. They need MPs who will stand up and oppose politically
motivated schemes which seem to have no upper limit when it comes to the
cost to the taxpayer, of which Casement Park is a prime example.
Similarly, the iniquitous Protocol is adding to the cost of living in Northern
Ireland, adding to paperwork for ordinary businesses, disrupting our supply
chain from Great Britain and driving up prices for you, the consumer.
Significantly, because of the Protocol Northern Ireland is tied to EU rules which
insist on at least 5% VAT on energy bills.
TUV has proved at council and Assembly level that we are the enemies of
squander. Our MPs will bring the same attitude to Westminster.
SUITABLE HOUSING FOR ALL
TUV believes that everyone is entitled to decent housing. The most common
request of Housing Executive and Housing Association tenants is for repairs to
be carried out in a timely manner. Given the expenditure proposed by others on
items which deliver no tangible day to day benefit - such as Casement - we
believe that adequate funding can be found for basics like proactive
maintenance and addressing issues like mould.
The dereliction of housing in working class areas cannot continue. TUV
proposes a policy of one house down and at least one house up in urban areas.
TUV believes that social engineering should play no part in housing policy.
The change wrought by an open border policy with the EU has left a legacy of
issues. Where assimilation has not occurred, it is often the indigenous
community that feels uncomfortable. TUV will not run away from such issues
but will ensure local communities are supported and their rights and interests
respected.
PAGE
16
TUV believes that there is an urgent need for reform of the housing points
system. For example, the current arrangement whereby homeless points are
only awarded 28 days prior to termination of a tenancy agreement does not
give people adequate time to secure alternative accommodation.
FAIR FUNDING DEAL FOR
NORTHERN IRELAND
TUV will fight in Westminster for a fair financial funding deal for Northern Ireland.
Whereas self-help must come from cutting out squander and waste, there must
be adequate funding for our essential services. Just as in other devolved regions
the funding formula has been updated to account for local needs, so Northern
Ireland must not be left behind. The profligacy of Stormont must not rob our
people of an objectively fair settlement.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND
DEFENCE
The UK has some of the best and bravest Armed Forces in the world. Yet
grandstanding politicians send our servicemen and women abroad with poor
equipment. They have cut the Army to its smallest size in 300 years. Military
housing is substandard.
Our wounded and veterans are often abandoned. Some still face unjust legal
claims. TUV believes that the Military Covenant should be reformed so those
who put their lives on the line get the support they deserve both during and
after service. We also believe that the 1998 Northern Ireland Act should be
amended to give full effect to the Military Covenant in all parts of the UK.
TUV believes that the whole of the UK should be able to benefit from Brexit and
the global opportunities it presents. When it comes to foreign affairs, as with so
much else, the Sea Border prevents us from taking advantage of this. Voting
TUV - No Sea Border on 4th July sends a message that that is unacceptable.
PAGE
17
STORMONT REFORM AND
THE CASE FOR BRITISH RULE
Though Stormont is back, it is fast falling into its dysfuctional routine. We have
minimal faith in Stormont’s ability to ever deliver. Therefore, in the absence of
any prospect or desire to move to a more workable system our default position
is British rule. We are clear that if it is a choice between British rule from
Westminster and Sinn Fein rule from Stormont TUV will always choose the
former.
The willingness of Westminster to legislate over the heads of MLAs on issues
like same sex marriage, abortion and Relationship and Sex Education totally
undermines the idea that Stormont provides Unionists with any kind of
guarantee to stop legislation they do not like.
The removal of the need for cross-community assent to the Protocol in the
upcoming vote on the matter is a particularly egregious assault on both
unionism and the supposed equilibrium of the Stormont modus operandi. For
decades majoritarianism has been depicted as the ultimate scourge of misrule,
but, now, suddenly when it suits, it is the needs must device to retain the
Protocol and secures its subjugation of Northern Ireland’s place in the United
Kingdom.
Hence, Stormont as a protector of equal treatment, never mind the unionist
position, is meaningless. Indeed, as a platform for the Sinn Fein agenda it is
better at serving that purpose.
While this is a Westminster election, TUV has a full range of policies covering all
the big issues, many of which are not the direct responsibly of Westminster.
These are outlined in the following pages.
HEALTH
While others claimed they wanted to get back to Stormont to sort the NHS, the
reality is that the promises about funding for the National Health Service were
forgotten once they were in the door. This year’s budget passed by Stormont
was down by 2.3% when compared to what was actually spent by the end of
last year.
The provision of a fully functioning and effective NHS is critical to us all. We do
not need more deputy directors; we need more doctors and nurses. TUV is
opposed to the closure of minor injuries units which will only increase pressures
on hospital A & Es.
PAGE
18
Nor should the closure of more local facilities be the default position to save
money. Yes, some services may require streamlining, but it must not be about
trumping local need.
Our U.K. NHS is of prime importance. It creaked under COVID but came
through, though years of underinvestment in our health service took its toll.
Waiting lists are appalling. It is nonsense to suggest that getting devolution
back will sort this. The situation in which we now find ourselves is, in large
measure, due to Stormont’s failure to prioritise health. Under DUP/SF rule
hundreds of beds and associated staff have been removed from Northern
Ireland hospitals. All because Stormont, shamefully, had greater priorities.
Today we are paying the price.
Sustaining long term investment in health is a TUV priority. While others
would squander millions on the Irish language, north/south structures and so
called ‘rights agendas,’ we say put the money into providing more nurses,
doctors and beds in our hospitals.
TUV recognises the importance of facing up to the mental health problem.
TUV supports increased funding for Community Mental Health services to
support people experiencing mental ill-health in their recovery and to further
support early intervention strategies which will help prevent the need for
hospital admissions.
We also believe that there is a need for adequate acute psychiatric beds so that
anyone who requires an acute hospital bed should be able to access it within
their Trust area. No patient should be forced to travel outside their Trust area
where they are less likely to benefit from the support of family and friends –
something which is vital when it comes to mental wellbeing.
Strenuous efforts are now required to make up the lost ground in meeting
general needs, particularly in respect of cancer.
A readily accessible GP service must also be restored, which of itself eases the
burden on Emergency Departments. Getting an appointment with a GP should
not be a challenge.
The haemorrhaging of skilled nurses and realignment to agencies is robbing our
health service of vital staff. The level of reliance on agency staff is astounding
and debilitating. The drift to agencies must be disincentivised and loyalty to the
NHS rewarded.
The Covid experience demonstrated how swiftly our hospitals can be
overwhelmed, not least because of lack of nursing staff. In our Assembly
PAGE
19
manifesto, TUV proposed that a Nursing Reserve Service should be created -
somewhat akin to the Army Reserve – whereby retired and former nurses could
be enlisted, required to keep up with relevant training, modestly remunerated as
reserves and available to be called upon in emergency. We will continue to
campaign for this.
The primary focus of our NHS is the saving of lives, yet some want it to become
an agency for death through the full commissioning of abortion services. TUV,
being unashamedly pro-life, opposes such demands by Sinn Fein, and Alliance
MLAs.
Halting the pandemic of destruction of the unborn, which abortion on demand
represents, is a key TUV goal.
EDUCATION
The shortage of funding and the imbalance between sectors is hitting the
controlled sector particularly hard. TUV wants to address this inequality.
TUV sees tackling educational underachievement as its number one priority, in
particular for the Protestant working class.
To do this, we propose the following:
• An evidence-informed curriculum overhaul;
• Investment in teacher recruitment and fair teacher pay;
• Creation of a system in which children can find different paths to successful
outcomes;
• A commitment to academic selection, but also to creating a more equal
system of exceptional Grammar and non-selective schools.
• A creation of a culture of "celebration" for hard work and achievement across
all aspects of school life.
• Helping children to see value in education, by ensuring it connects them to a
job market which harnesses their skills and talents;
• Supporting schools to connect with their communities, parents, and external
agencies.
PAGE
20
• Vocational training, for those seeking apprenticeships, commencing at school
and moving on to FE with employer support.
• Developing a culture of trust in and respect for the teaching profession,
which has been eroded.
TUV believes in a fair deal for classroom assistants including greater job security
and holiday pay.
CHILDCARE
Given the focus on childcare during the last
Assembly election and the promises which
were made, it is shocking that less than half of
the money Stormont received as a result of
the Barnett Consequential allocation in
relation to childcare provision in England and
Wales, is actually being spent on childcare.
In response to a written question from Jim
Allister, the Finance Minister revealed that the
Executive received £57.2 million of Barnett
Consequentials for 2024-25, following the
announcement in the Spring Budget of the
expansion of the 30 free hours of childcare
scheme in England.
However, Stormont’s 2024-25 Budget provides just £25m to support the
development of a Childcare Strategy. This means that more than £32 million
from our share of money, which should have gone to childcare, is being spent
elsewhere.
Does this decision really speak to a local administration which is in tune with the
needs of ordinary working families? TUV believes the money allocated by
Westminster for childcare should be spent on childcare.
PAGE
21
AGRICULTURE
One DUP candidate in this election referred to the issue of the EU threat to
veterinary medicines as a "time bomb". The opportunity to insist on the
defusing of that time bomb was before the DUP gave up their leverage, and it is
a disappointment that other things mattered more than our farming community.
Those who present themselves as the friends of farmers let down the farmers
when sacrificing that issue.
As far as the EU side is concerned, it is a nonsense - throughout the grace
periods since we left the EU not a single threat has been posed by the
veterinary medicines that we are using to the EU's single market or to animal
health. Yet the EU says that we cannot continue to use the very medicines that
are not causing a problem. That is a typical EU triumph of dogma over reality,
with a punitive tinge that is often there when it comes to how the EU deals with
matters. It knows that pharmaceutical companies are now forward-planning and
deciding what they will and will not produce for where, yet the EU hangs back
and has refused to arrive at an arrangement to solve a problem that is not a
problem for the EU but that is a mammoth problem for Northern Ireland and its
agri-food industry.
PAGE
22
Our traditional path for accessing medicines is from GB — 85% come from there
— and not one of them has inflicted any damage or hurt anywhere in the EU on
animals or on health, yet, despite that proven track record of non-damage, the
EU belligerently refuses to do the decent thing.
Northern Ireland was betrayed under the protocol and left subject to EU law,
and the veterinary medicines division of the European Medicines Agency (EMA).
We are now paying the price: a price that is there only to extract pain and
discomfort and to serve no animal health purpose at all. That is the approach of
the EU.
You can give Brussels your answer on this by voting TUV - No Sea Border on
4th July.
Food production and farming is an integrated £5 billion industry in Northern
Ireland. The centrality of our farming and food sector to Northern Ireland’s
economy means its future must not be jeopardised by pursuit of an anti-farming
ideology associated with climate change activists. The support by Sinn Fein,
SDLP, Alliance and the UUP of the Green Party’s Private Member’s Bill was
ill-judged and wholly prejudicial to the future of farming. TUV was clear and
determined in opposing this disastrous Bill and will continue to protect farming
interests.
The devastating situation in Ukraine has brought massive detriment both to
world food production and the cost of essential feedstuffs and materials like
fertiliser. Hence the utter folly of pursuit of net zero Climate Change demands
which will reduce our food production capacity in Northern Ireland.
Going forward, as sectors feel the pressure of the new world situation and its
ramifications, focused assistance will inevitably be required. TUV will campaign
for such as and when necessary.
Crew migration limitations and burdens resulting from the absence of a full
Brexit continue to blight this once great fishing industry. TUV will continue to
fight for our ports.
PAGE
23
POLICING AND JUSTICE
There is a huge crisis of confidence in the PSNI within the Unionist community.
The reasons are transparent.
Blatant two-tier policing must end. The police’s handling of a number of issues
has shattered confidence in the PSNI.
There must be no return to the anti-Protestant discrimination of 50/50.
Recruitment on merit is an imperative from which there must be no departure.
TUV will continue to be vigilant on this issue.
The equivocation of DOJ and the PSNI over who - if anyone - investigates
non-terrorist criminality of the IRA, fuels our belief that under the so called
‘peace process’ there is an understanding that there will be a blind eye
approach to the extra-curriculum activities of the Provisionals. Such is
intolerable and will continue to be pursued by TUV.
In the last Assembly, Jim Allister drafted a Private Members Bill to ban
convicted criminals like Gerry Kelly from holding positions on the Policing
Board. Sadly, this Bill was defeated by the combined efforts of Sinn Fein, the
SDLP and Alliance.
INNOCENT VICTIMS
TUV believes that we need to radically change the whole approach to the issue
of legacy and victims. To this end we demand that:
• The definition of victim needs to change to exclude victim makers. Until this
root problem is addressed there can be no real progress on victims’ issues.
The innocent must reclaim the word “victim.”
• There can be no amnesty. Many victims continue to demand justice and
should not be denied this.
• Terrorists have already proved they have no interest in the truth so any form
of “truth commission” should be rejected.
• The PSNI should get serious about criminal investigations of historic crimes
where evidence exists and political considerations should play no part.
PAGE
24
• The Republic of Ireland should face up to its historic role in facilitating
terrorism in Northern Ireland by providing a safe haven for terrorists.
• Legislation on the glorification of terrorism needs to be revisited and applied
equally across the UK regardless of the terror group being celebrated.
TUV is opposed to the Legacy Act which has shut the door on justice.
VALUING OUR SENIOR CITIZENS
TUV recognises the invaluable contribution which our senior citizens continue
to make to Northern Ireland. Yet, their lives are often made more difficult by
decisions such as the closure of bank branches, making adequate public
transport even more necessary.
Deficiencies in the availability of care packages, particularly in rural areas, is
causing upset to many families. TUV will continue to campaign on these issues.
We recognise that the rise in energy prices hits the elderly particularly hard.
While the winter fuel payment scheme is welcome, it provides limited relief and
it is, therefore, necessary to focus on the fundamental changes to energy policy
highlighted earlier in this manifesto in order to address the heart of the issue.
TUV will work to maintain the triple lock on state pensions.
While generally sceptical of quangos, TUV recognises that the Older People’s
Commissioner has done an excellent job in standing up for the group he
represents.
LIFE AND FAMILY
You know where you stand with TUV when it comes to the big social issues of
the day.
While others went back into government with Sinn Fein based on an Act (the
Executive Formation Act of 2019) which also redefined marriage in law in
Northern Ireland and introduced one of the most liberal abortion regimes in
Europe, TUV warned against such a course of action.
We continue to stand up, unashamedly, for traditional family values.
The attack on gender identity is the latest target of agitators determined to rip
apart the fabric of society. TUV will actively oppose such, including this so
called “progressive” agenda in our schools.
PAGE
25
TUV’s moral compass means we remain resolute in opposing terrorists in
government, amnesty for terrorists, destruction of the unborn and the dilution
of marriage and gender identity as determined at birth.
Just as we support the rights of the unborn, so at the end-of-life stage we
oppose euthanasia. We believe in the sanctity of life. In the new Parliament,
especially if Labour wins, these will all be major issues.
FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS
The right to life is paramount but is not the only fundamental right under attack
in Northern Ireland.
Denial of religion, conscience and belief can come in many forms, even from
those who proclaim their liberalism! The Asher’s Bakery case was a classic
illustration of an illiberal attempt to suppress freedom of expression and
conscience. Thankfully, it failed and the Supreme Court upheld the right of a
business to refuse to be a vehicle to promote values which conflict with its
owner’s beliefs.
The appalling role of the Equality Commission in that case causes TUV to
believe it requires fundamental overhaul.
We do not have to agree with what is said to defend the right to say it, provided
it is otherwise lawful.
Attacks on street preachers and the ban on protests in proximity to abortion
clinics show that liberties, which have long been taken for granted, are under
attack or simply are no more.
TUV believes that religious belief, teaching, and practice is a fundamental
human right and will oppose any moves to dilute this.
PROTECTING WOMEN’S RIGHTS
While identity has long been associated with culture and politics in Northern
Ireland, TUV recognises that in recent years identity has been challenged at a
more basic and fundamental level. It might not be in tune with the woke spirit of
the age, but TUV believes that gender is determined at birth.
TUV does not accept that “gender-neutral” changing areas should become the
norm or that biological males should be permitted to access women’s only
spaces.
PAGE
26
TUV does not accept that biological males should compete in female sports
events.
TUV believes that we should not be afraid to use the words “women” and “girls”
when framing legislation.
MAKING TOURISM ABOUT
NORTHERN IRELAND AGAIN
Northern Ireland has many unique selling points when it comes to tourism. In
North Antrim we have the world renowned Giant’s Causeway, Fermanagh has its
lakes and South Down the Mournes. Across Northern Ireland there are superb
golf courses which have helped foster the talent of world class golfers and cul-
tural attractions, like the Twelfth, need to be marketed much better.
Northern Ireland is being held back and prevented from making the most of
these uniquely Northern Ireland selling points.
On the international market Ireland is sold as a single destination by the cross
border body Tourism Ireland. Tourism NI is even prohibited from promoting
Northern Ireland in Great Britain - only Tourism Ireland can do so. This
nonsensical constraint is hampering the growth of our tourism industry.
.
Many Northern Ireland visitors come from mainland UK. TUV is committed to
maintaining our port and airport links to ensure that this increases, but access
to our international airport must be enhanced by a direct rail link.
PAGE
27
SPORT
The success of both our women's football team and local golfers has
demonstrated that sportsmen and women from Northern Ireland can compete
with the best on the international stage. Sadly, however, all is not positive when
it comes to sport in Northern Ireland.
As any football fan knows, the Belfast Agreement has led to a situation where
the Republic of Ireland has been able to poach many of our most promising
footballers.
However, when it comes to other sports, young men and women do not have
the right to choose which national flag they compete under. TUV will fight for
the right of athletes from Northern Ireland in all sports to compete on the
international stage for the United Kingdom. We will also contend in favour of
the playing of the National Anthem at major sporting events.
TUV is the only party to be consistent in making the arguments against
Casement Park. In response, it has often been claimed that we shouldn’t have a
problem with the project because football will also benefit as the stadium would
host the Euros.
This was always a nonsensical argument but, even the GAA has conceded as
much.
Yet another opportunity has been presented for the DUP Communities Minister
to find reverse gear on a project which was ill-conceived. It has been bedevilled
by problems from day one. It is grossly over budget. With the admission that it
will not benefit any sport other than the GAA, it is time for Gordon Lyons to pull
the plug on the project and halt the squander of any more public money on
Casement Park.
Failing that, there should, at the very least, be provision for the government to
claw back some of the cost of the project from non-GAA events hosted at
Casement. In 2022, for example, the GAA raked in €7.6 million from the Gareth
Brooks concerts at Croke Park. Casement should not become a similar cash cow
for the GAA given that it is being built at public expense.
PAGE
28
OUR CANDIDATES
PAGE
29
Belfast North
David Clarke
Belfast East
John Ross
Belfast West
Ann McClure
Belfast South and
Mid Down
Dan Boucher
East Antrim
Matthew Warwick
North Antrim
Jim Allister
South Antrim
Mel Lucas
East Londonderry
Allister Kyle
PAGE
30
West Tyrone
Stevan Patterson
Lagan Valley
Lorna Smyth
South Down
Jim Wells
Strangford
Ron McDowell
Newry and Armagh
Keith Ratcliffe
Mid Ulster
Glenn Moore
