NORTH-SOUTH AND EAST-WEST COOPERATION.
East-West.
 Whilst its origins lie in the desire for a new devolved administration in Northern Ireland to build relationships with both governments, the British Irish Council should now have a much wider role in enhancing and managing British- Irish relations and providing a forum for governments across these islands. This potential has not yet been realised, and post- EU Exit, it is more important than ever.
There are opportunities to further develop cooperation in areas such as energy, the environment, public health, education, trade, and transport.

IMPACT ON PUBLIC SERVICES, ECONOMY AND CLIMATE.
In this fiscal climate, our public services have been squeezed beyond recognition. Health waiting lists are rising, school budgets are inadequate to meet needs, and there is insufficient funding for key areas of public concern, such as the economy, policing and justice, and environmental protection. Without reform, public services will continue to decline and decay at the expense of societal well- being, and our economic and environmental future.
The UK economy continues to underperform.
Brexit has caused further challenges, and the additional resultant trade barriers to the UK’s largest market have hindered growth significantly.
The UK is also facing significant environmental risks. There are enormous costs associated with climate inaction. Recent research suggests that this will cost the global economy £30 trillion per year by 2049. Huge economic and social impacts are currently accruing and are not actively factored into political decision-making.
Significant investment is required to offset this decline in public services and to mitigate economic and environmental risks. Alliance believes that there is a potential solution to the public funding/debt deadlock and that it lies in fundamental reform of elements of the UK’s fiscal framework – specifically, Fiscal Rules.


NORTHERN IRELAND PUBLIC FINANCES.
Northern Ireland is not adequately funded to reflect relative need, and so our capacity to sustain and transform public services is hindered. To sustain and transform our education, health and justice systems, to invest in public sector pay, drive the local economy and protect our environment, we need fair funding.
To achieve this, Alliance will: 
• Work to secure a base-lined fiscal floor, set above 124, at the next spending review. We do not believe the UK Government’s figure of 124 captures our relative need and believe this will be borne out by independent analysis that the Treasury should commission.
• Continue to press for long-term transformation and public spending on an ‘invest to save’ basis. There is much more we can do with the money we have to ensure quality public services for people in NI.
• Tackle the cost of division. Research from 2016 cited the costs of division in NI ranged between £400-800m. We want the UK Government to fund new research into the updated costs, so that we can tackle it and funnel savings back into public services.

DEALING WITH PANDEMICS.
Alliance believes that we must learn lessons from the recent COVID-19 pandemic to enhance the response to future disease outbreaks with pandemic potential. We must ensure that the health service and other key workers are better prepared and supported to meet the challenges of another pandemic. We will advocate for better global co-operation from the next UK Government to mitigate and manage outbreaks.
We value expert scientific advice and believe that it should inform government policy to help protect the population’s health during outbreaks.