CHAPTER 2 UK PUBLIC FINANCES.
UK public finances are in a difficult space – Public Sector Net Debt is at a level last seen in the early 1960s. This is after over a decade of damaging austerity initiated by the UK Government to address the post-2008 financial bailout and associated debt overhang. Covid-related expenditure has since contributed to debt levels, and there is no obvious way out of this precarious financial position under current Treasury rules.
The Truss/Kwarteng Mini Budget compounded the situation by undermining trust and credibility in the UK Government and causing underlying interest rates to spike; they remain elevated as a result. This has had the dual effect of increasing borrowing costs for the UK Government and homeowners and businesses – many households are still to feel these impacts when they reach the end of fixed-rate mortgage deals.
Realistically, future economic and financial shocks are highly probable, particularly given rising global geopolitical tensions. Public sector debt levels will continue to face pressure from emerging crises, and the UK Government must unravel the conflict that this creates in terms of financing essential public services and investing in the future.
2.1 IMPACT ON PUBLIC SERVICES, ECONOMY AND CLIMATE.
In this fiscal climate, our public services have been squeezed beyond recognition. Health waiting lists are rising, school budgets are inadequate to meet needs, and there is insufficient funding for key areas of public concern, such as the economy, policing and justice, and environmental protection. Without reform, public services will continue to decline and decay at the expense of societal well- being, and our economic and environmental future.
The UK economy continues to underperform.
Brexit has caused further challenges, and the additional resultant trade barriers to the UK’s largest market have hindered growth significantly.
The UK is also facing significant environmental risks. There are enormous costs associated with climate inaction. Recent research suggests that this will cost the global economy £30 trillion per year by 2049. Huge economic and social impacts are currently accruing and are not actively factored into political decision-making.
Significant investment is required to offset this decline in public services and to mitigate economic and environmental risks. Alliance believes that there is a potential solution to the public funding/debt deadlock and that it lies in fundamental reform of elements of the UK’s fiscal framework – specifically, Fiscal Rules.
2.2 FISCAL RULES REFORM.
We know that fiscal discipline is vital in protecting the UK’s credit rating and the associated costs of servicing public sector debt. Fiscal Rules – essentially the spending discipline that the Government observes to ensure that expenditure is responsible, sustainable, and not unduly subjected to political short-termism – are extremely important in ensuring financial stability.
However, there is an emerging argument that these Fiscal Rules are too restrictive and, as such, are constraining investment, economic growth and environmental protection.
Alliance believes that this argument is particularly pertinent in relation to expenditure on the environment. The UK’s current fiscal framework does not adequately reflect future costs associated with environmental inaction, which, as quantified above, runs into trillions of pounds annually.
The disconnect between political short- termism and the inherently future-orientated impact of environmental spending needs to be better identified and mitigated in public spending decisions.
Alliance believes reforming the Fiscal Rules could unlock significant investment, including for a Green New Deal – see Chapter 4 for more information. This could be funded via long-term bond issuance in addition to existing UK Green Gilts. Without such reform, UK fiscal policy is reinforcing relative climate inaction and storing up environmental, social and financial crises for the future.
On this basis, Alliance believes there is scope to unlock additional expenditure at a UK Government level, including for NI. This can be done in a fiscally prudent manner to prevent unintended consequences regarding financial market reactions and underlying interest rates.
This would necessitate strategic targeting of associated expenditure in areas that will mitigate the – as yet not fully captured – costs of environmental inaction and would add to the future value of the UK’s natural environment, economy and wider infrastructure.
We believe that UK Fiscal Rules should recognise the impact of spending on UK Government’s overall asset base in terms of broader economic infrastructure, natural resources and the quality of our environment – not merely the impact on debt and deficit, as is currently the case. If public sector spending creates additional net wealth, albeit on the basis of interim debt incurrence, then it could and should be deemed fiscally prudent.
Significant climate and environmental expenditure would also provide enhanced cover for households and businesses in terms of ongoing geopolitical risks and shocks, and the threat that this presents in terms of energy price fluctuations, and the impact on the cost of living/doing business. A greener and more energy-efficient infrastructure would reduce exposure to oil and gas price shocks and be a sound investment for households and businesses alike.
We believe this investment is also key to addressing many of the deficiencies in the overall UK and NI economies at present.
Strategic, targeted investment could unlock new skills, jobs and technologies. This would also address stalled investment levels in the UK – which are constraining growth – providing a stable policy outlook and unlocking additional private sector investment.
Alliance will continue to advocate for reform of the Fiscal Framework on a strategic and fiscally prudent basis, to benefit public services, the economy and the environment.
We firmly believe this would unlock much- needed funding for NI and enable us to invest in public services and our future prosperity.
2.3 TAXATION, PENSIONS AND WELFARE SUPPORT.
As set out above, Alliance believes there is a credible case for increasing the total quantum of funding available to the UK Government for strategic expenditure via a revised fiscal framework. Two other core components of the net funding envelope, namely taxation and welfare support, are determined by UK Government Fiscal Policy, and have huge implications on household wellbeing in Northern Ireland.
Taxation.
Alliance maintains that there is potential for a fairer, more redistributive system without any additional tax being levied on ordinary working households. We believe the current UK taxation policy fails to adequately capture and reflect wealth and should be revised to ensure a more progressive tax system.
Loopholes in the tax system accommodate significant tax avoidance for the super- wealthy.
Increasing tax on the super-wealthy would allow for increased personal income tax allowances, providing much-needed relief for hard-working individuals/households – many of whom have been subjected to fiscal drag over recent years due to inflation-linked pay increases, which, in fact, leave them worse off in net income terms.
We believe there is scope for a shift in taxation related to environmental protection, including carbon taxes. Evidence suggests that sectors in which environmental taxes have been becoming more onerous – industry, power generation and waste – have been successful in reducing emissions, whereas sectors with more stable taxation, such as aviation and transport, have made much less progress.
We would therefore support enhanced taxation in these areas, provided it is phased and proportionate, implemented in a manner that is progressive for consumers and minimises any unintended disruption to business activity and investment intentions. It is also our preference that, where environmental taxes are levied, there is a clear linkage with investment in environmental improvement and tackling climate change.
We would also like to see a tax on share buybacks, as has recently been implemented in the US, to incentivise productive business investment, support the transition to net zero and raise much-needed public funds for investment in public services. These buybacks occur when huge corporations use their profits to inflate their own share price – usually this involves oil and gas giants and big banks; the same corporations who are profiting the most from the cost-of-living crisis. It is estimated that a tax on share buybacks would raise around £1.4bn per year.
Pensions Alliance is committed to protecting UK State Pensions, including keeping the Triple Lock.
The current levels of state pension provisions in the UK are relatively low by European standards.
Alliance believes auto-enrolment in workplace pensions is a key tool in ensuring people have a dignified retirement. We are committed to implementing a range of improvements in the auto-enrolment system, including lowering the age for automatic enrolment from 22 to 18, action to prevent the exclusion of low earners from auto-enrolment as a result of the current earnings trigger, and exploring options to default self-employed people into pension savings.
To address the maladministration suffered by women born in the 1950s and affected by changes to the State Pension age, we support a compensation system that – in line with the WASPI campaign – is adjusted to reflect the extent of the change in the individual’s State Pension age and how much notice they received.
Welfare Support.
The UK continues to face a very significant cost of living crisis, with many households – including both those with and without people in employment – struggling to meet the basic standard of living. The use of food banks continues to increase every year and pressures on households with children are particularly acute.
Alliance will work to end to the callous approach to welfare reform, which has severely harmed low-income households. We support ending the Benefits Cap, Bedroom Tax and two-child limit on Child Benefit on a UK-wide basis. We also believe in a more empathetic approach to medical assessments; cessation of regular re-assessments for those with progressive or incurable conditions; the abolition of punitive sanctions and a renewed focus on skills development and training for those within the welfare system.
A wealth of evidence has demonstrated the link between the two-child limit in Universal Credit and higher poverty rates among larger families, with a harsh impact on children.
Scrapping the policy would be one of the most efficient ways of reducing child poverty across the UK.
The five-week wait for initial Universal Credit payments is also leaving many claimants struggling to afford basic living costs and locked into a cycle of debt from the beginning of their UC journey. A wider review is needed to look at ways of making the Universal Credit system more flexible and responsive for new claimants. We also support the establishment of an Essentials Guarantee in the social security system, ensuring that people’s incomes cover the cost of living.
Carer’s Allowance remains one of the lowest benefits of its kind in the entire welfare system. To better recognise the enormous contribution unpaid carers make to public services, Alliance supports the delivery of a Carer’s Allowance Supplement and extension of the Carer’s Allowance earnings threshold.
We also support increases in support for maternity, paternity, shared-parental and adoption entitlements.
2.4 CHILDCARE.
Families and households in Northern Ireland are currently suffering from a super-disparity in childcare support relative to those in other regions of the UK. Not only is this inequitable, but Alliance considers childcare to be key infrastructure that would allow us to unlock current and future economic potential, and we would urgently prioritise investment in childcare provision.
We have proposed a bespoke model for Northern Ireland – an Affordable Childcare Scheme – that will deliver better outcomes for children, reduced costs for parents, and enhance the sustainability of childcare provision.
We note the Northern Ireland Education Minister’s announcement that he aims to develop an interim scheme later in the year.
This is welcome, and we recognise much of our own proposals in what the Minister has set out. However, Westminster also has a role to play.
We are calling for: • Improvements to the UK Government’s Tax-Free Childcare scheme such as a more user-friendly interface; increasing/removing the cap, and increasing the relief from 20% to 35%.
• Better information for parents on the types of childcare available, support with costs and the potential risks of using unregistered providers.
You find can out more about our childcare policy and see our more comprehensive range of recommendations in Children First: Alliance’s Proposals for Child-centred and Affordable Childcare, published in October 2023.
2.5 NORTHERN IRELAND PUBLIC FINANCES.
The level of public finances available to NI underpins the Executive and Assembly’s capacity to sustain and transform public services such as health, education and justice, invest in public sector pay, drive the local economy, and protect our environment.
Public Finances Alliance played a pivotal role in negotiating and securing the £3.3bn financial package in December 2023. During the period of collapse, we made numerous representations to the UK Government to flag the false economies associated with the neglect of public services and pay levels in Northern Ireland. We advocated for a financial package to stabilise and transform public finances and public services.
Restoring our financial health will require stabilisation of the current financial crisis, and subsequent transformation of public spending to place public finances and services on a more sustainable footing. Northern Ireland cannot achieve better outcomes through continued cuts. Longer-term solutions are needed.
Whilst welcome, the financial package that ultimately materialised from the UK Government fell far short of what was required and entirely failed to account for the funding gap in previous years. Northern Ireland’s public finances are in a perilous state, and essential public sector pay awards have largely subsumed any additional money for this financial year contained in the Treasury package.
Fundamentally, the core level of funding for NI is key for our economic, social and financial wellbeing. There is a credible basis to question whether Northern Ireland is adequately funded by the UK Government based on relative need. The Fiscal Council suggests that we have been structurally underfunded by between £300–£400m per year since 2022 versus the level we would receive if an appropriate Fiscal Floor were in place. This is based on an assessment of relative need of 124% in NI, i.e. for every £100 spent in England, £124 must be spent in NI to ensure equivalent funding based on relative underlying needs.
Alliance believes that a Fiscal Floor of 124 does not reflect our relative need in NI versus England. The current assessment of 124% is based on spending on policing and justice in the period from 2017-2022 (which has been used as a measure of related ‘need’). However, this period was characterised by continuing cuts to the Department of Justice budget, whereas the prior, ringfenced funding period from 2010-2015 was arguably more reflective of true policing and justice needs, as identified by the UK Government when the powers were first devolved.
Alliance is committed to securing a base-lined fiscal floor, set at a level in excess of 124, as part of the next UK Spending Review. This process should be informed by external independent analysis.
This historical underfunding continues to be compounded by significant inefficiencies in how money is spent in Northern Ireland, including the slow rate of reform in many areas and the distortions that come from trying to manage a divided society. Research by Ulster University in 2016 indicated that division in NI costs between £400m and £800m per annum. Alliance, of course, advocates inclusivity and a phased elimination of division. As referenced in chapter one, we believe the UK Government should fund new, comprehensive research into the updated cost of division in NI.
Building on our Assembly Party Manifesto, in order to maximise the impact of the Northern Ireland budget, we believe four key areas of reform are needed: 1 Reducing the costs of division.
2 Reforming the public sector, including early intervention and protection.
3 Improving budget setting and scrutiny processes.
4 Reviewing existing and potential revenue raising options, and consideration of tax- varying powers.
For further details on what we would do in these areas, please see our 2022 Assembly Manifesto.
Maximising Shared Island Funding Alliance also welcomes the Shared Island Funding, and the support it has provided to a broad range of projects in Northern Ireland over recent years. Alliance will explore with the Irish Government how this fund can be increased and deployed to further projects in a wider range of areas, where our shared challenges and solutions across the island would be enhanced by such investment.
CHAPTER 3 NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY.
We believe Northern Ireland can become the most innovative and dynamic regional economy in Europe. Despite the challenges facing us, Northern Ireland has the capacity to become more competitive and outward- looking.
We must build on our emerging strengths in terms of fintech, cyber, pharma and the creative industries, while bolstering our foundation in advanced manufacturing, agri- food, retail and hospitality. Within an open and market-based economy, businesses are the driving force behind employment and prosperity.
However, we acknowledge that relatively low levels of productivity, skills gaps and mismatches, infrastructure gaps, labour market inefficiencies and high levels of economic inactivity all need to be addressed.
Alliance will strive to exploit all trade and business services opportunities with other parts of the UK, on an all-island basis, with the wider EU and, indeed, globally. Of particular significance is how the UK rebuilds its relationship and more closely aligns with the EU.
Our most recent Assembly Manifesto provides more details on Alliance’s priorities in the devolved space, including investment in skills, research and infrastructure, and reform of the planning system.
3.1 CHANGING UK ECONOMIC POLICY.
The UK’s economic strategy is in need of a cohesive and comprehensive overhaul. In recent years, the UK economy has grappled with a host of challenges, from productivity levels and public and private investment to skills shortages and labour market inefficiency.
The impact of Brexit, including increased trade barriers with the EU, our largest and closest market, has further hampered growth.
It’s crucial to note that the UK economy is one of the most regionally unbalanced in Europe, with only 3 out of 12 regions contributing to the Treasury.
In other sections of this manifesto, Alliance sets out our proposals for a Green New Deal and our relationship with the EU, both of which are central to the development of a new economic plan.
In addition to those steps, the UK government can take many other measures to assist the Northern Ireland economy. 
Alliance MPs will work at Westminster to secure action from the UK Government to: 
• Support regional industries by boosting research, innovation, skills, infrastructure and access to finance across the entire UK.
• Continue the development of broadband, high-speed mobile internet access and similar telecommunications projects in a manner that ensures all parts of the UK benefit from this technology.
• Support expansion of the British Business Bank & UK Infrastructure Bank to perform a strategic role in the local economy, ensuring that viable small and medium- sized businesses have access to capital, including in relation to environmental and other investment with deferred returns.
• Establish a UK Export Fund for SMEs, to enable enhanced export orientation.
• Introduce a reduced rate of VAT for tourism and hospitality businesses.
• Create a legal duty on the UK Government to ensure its economic policies are assessed on their likelihood of reducing regional inequality in the economy and that levelling up is accelerated.
• Support ongoing delivery and expansion of City Deals for Northern Ireland.
• Seek introduction of Regional Rebalancing Programme for infrastructure spend across the nations and regions of the UK, with local and devolved authorities to be given a say in how it is used, reinforced by Just Transition funding for areas particularly affected by the transition to net zero greenhouse gas emissions.
• Seek expansion of Enhanced Investment Zone (EIZ) funding to focus on job creation and economic development in areas of innovative and sectoral strength.
• Invest strategically to ensure that Northern Ireland has the skills and ability to attract greater levels of funding from projects such as UK Research Councils and meet emerging labour market skills demands.
• Establish renewed partnerships between Government and local businesses to formalise business representation, improve co-ordination and enable engagement North-South and East-West.
• Review investment levels in skills, the funding model for colleges, universities and apprenticeships and student finance for England – as revised outcomes may have beneficial outcomes for Northern Ireland.
3.2 SUPPORTING NORTHERN IRELAND’S ECONOMY.
While the devolved institutions hold many economic policy levers, the UK Government has a crucial role to play. By working in collaboration with the Executive and Assembly, the UK Government can significantly bolster the Northern Ireland economy.
NI Trade and Exports.
The UK Government has an important role in supporting exports from Northern Ireland, as well as ensuring UK trade deals do not have a detrimental effect on key NI industries, such as agrifood. This includes the appropriate inclusion of Northern Ireland businesses on trade missions and access to trade shows.
Similarly, fair access to export finance must be ensured. However, there needs to be a clear distinction between the roles of the UK Government and Invest NI.
We would support the development of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Department for Business and Trade and Invest NI to clarify and formalise those roles and linkages.
Promoting Dual Market Access The Windsor Framework provides Northern Ireland with a relative opportunity compared to the rest of the UK that comes from unfettered access to both the market in Great Britain and the Irish/EU market in terms of goods.
Alongside the Northern Ireland Executive and Invest NI, the UK Government must take action to promote this particular opportunity and avoid taking any steps or failing to keep EU law up-to-date that would undermine this comparative advantage.
Alliance will hold the UK Government to account with regards to exploiting all opportunities associated with dual market access.
Apprenticeship Levy.
The Apprenticeship Levy is collected from many Northern Ireland businesses; however, they do not receive any direct benefits from it, as the proceeds of the levy are collected by the UK Government and then reallocated to the Northern Ireland Executive’s Block Grant.
Discontent regarding the Apprenticeship Levy has also been raised in Great Britain.
Alliance will support a general review of the Apprenticeship Levy across the UK, and ensure that any levy raised from Northern Ireland is ring-fenced for re-investment in skills.
Defence Procurement.
Northern Ireland currently receives the lowest share per capita in the United Kingdom of defence contracts.
Alliance will continue to lobby the Ministry of Defence to ensure that Northern Ireland- based companies have proper opportunities to compete for contracts and that the local SME sector can access related opportunities in both Northern Ireland and Great Britain.
Levelling Up and Shared Prosperity Alliance recognised the significant impact of the loss of EU funding to Northern Ireland, particularly the Structural Funds of the European Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund. We are deeply concerned that the replacement funds, such as the Shared Prosperity Fund and other Levelling Up Funds are controlled by the UK Government, rather than aligned with devolved priorities and without requisite tailoring to local needs.
There has been a significant reduction in funding to Northern Ireland, coupled with the imposition of unnecessary and costly bidding competitions, short-termism, uncertainty as to the areas of activity that will be supported, plus duplication in some areas and gaps in others. Many core services, including apprenticeship, labour market inclusion measures, disability employment, regeneration and economic development measures are in jeopardy.
Alliance will seek a fundamental review of the design of Levelling Up and Shared Prosperity Funds to ensure they target the most impactful and sustained interventions and will continue to lobby for the resources and responsibility for these funds to be transferred to the Executive.