Alliance is already leading change on better health outcomes, making our communities safer, expanding inclusive education and delivering affordable childcare.
Northern Ireland is not adequately funded to reflect relative need, and so our capacity to sustain and transform public services is hindered. To sustain and transform our education, health and justice systems, to invest in public sector pay, drive the local economy and protect our environment, we need fair funding.
East-West.
 Whilst its origins lie in the desire for a new devolved administration in Northern Ireland to build relationships with both governments, the British Irish Council should now have a much wider role in enhancing and managing British- Irish relations and providing a forum for governments across these islands. This potential has not yet been realised, and post- EU Exit, it is more important than ever.
There are opportunities to further develop cooperation in areas such as energy, the environment, public health, education, trade, and transport.
Creating a successor fund to the Fresh Start capital fund for shared and integrated education. This should encompass the remaining integrated school projects that lost out on Fresh Start funding and should also expand to include investment in early years and early intervention. This fund would be transformative in its scope and should be collaborative in nature and focused on shared outcomes through trauma-informed projects. As with Fresh Start, this would be additional to other funding streams such as PeacePlus and from philanthropic funding.
We note the Northern Ireland Education Minister’s announcement that he aims to develop an interim scheme later in the year.
This is welcome, and we recognise much of our own proposals in what the Minister has set out. However, Westminster also has a role to play.
We are calling for: 
• Improvements to the UK Government’s Tax-Free Childcare scheme such as a more user-friendly interface; increasing/removing the cap, and increasing the relief from 20% to 35%.
• Better information for parents on the types of childcare available, support with costs and the potential risks of using unregistered providers.

Ensure that migrants’ and refugees’ qualifications and prior learning are recognised to reflect need in the local economy and to ensure they can continue their education and find employment that corresponds to their skills.
Pay particular attention to protecting the rights and well-being of women across the world, given that women are typically financially and politically disadvantaged in comparison to men, and recognising that, access to education is a priority.