WORKING AND WINNING FOR YOU. SPEAKING UP FOR NORTHERN IRELAND.
GENERAL ELECTION MANIFESTO 2024 Making NI Work.
 On 4th July voters will face a clear choice at this General Election.
Do they want to elect those who will go to our national Parliament and unashamedly make the case for Northern Ireland within the Union, wanting to promote it and do the best for it or will they be represented by people who won’t go or who will spend their time talking Northern Ireland down?
The Democratic Unionist Party has an experienced track record of speaking up for you on issues that matter. While others talk about delivery, we can stand over what has been achieved. The DUP has the strength and depth to be able to make the Pro-Union case and to unashamedly make the case for Northern Ireland in Parliament.
For Northern Ireland to truly flourish, it needs the United Kingdom to succeed and likewise for the UK to truly flourish it needs all its constituent parts and regions to succeed.
This requires a strong DUP team in Westminster who will take their seats on the opposition benches and speak up for Northern Ireland, a team who will work with their DUP colleagues in the Assembly to ensure we collectively deliver for you. As we proved before, more seats means more influence which means more delivered for Northern Ireland.
This manifesto and our commitments at this General Election are focused on ensuring Northern Ireland can thrive as a secure and vibrant part of the United Kingdom. We are seeking a mandate to continue Making Northern Ireland Work by: 1. Promoting the Union and Removing Barriers Within the United Kingdom; 2. Putting You First - Delivering Fair and Equitable Funding for Our NHS, and Other Public Services; 3. Campaigning to Protect Family Incomes; 4. Unleashing our Full Economic Potential; 5. A Strategic Role for UK Defence and Security; 6. Backing our Farmers and Food Security; 7. Leading a Fairer - Not Faster – Path Towards Net-Zero; 8. Defending Our Most Vulnerable; 9. Investing More in National Infrastructure, and; 10. Standing Up for Victims of Crime.
By voting DUP on 4th July, you can back our positive plan and ensure our children inherit Northern Ireland in better shape than when we found it.
Gavin Robinson Leader, Democratic Unionist Party.
Leader’s Message.
OUR COMMITMENT TO YOU...
The Democratic Unionist Party has an experienced track record of speaking up for you on issues that matter. The DUP has the strength and depth to be able to make the Pro-Union case and to unashamedly make the case for Northern Ireland in Parliament.
On 4th July we seek your support to elect Democratic Unionist Members of Parliament who are committed to...
PROMOTING THE UNION.
Working as a strong DUP team to promote and strengthen the case for the Union between Northern Ireland and the rest of the United Kingdom in Parliament.
PUTTING YOU FIRST.
Putting you, the people of Northern Ireland first, by working with other parties in Parliament to ensure that Northern Ireland’s case is always spotlighted, particularly focusing on the just cause of a long-term fair and equitable funding model for Northern Ireland’s needs.
REMOVING BARRIERS WITHIN THE UK.
Sending a strong message to a new Government that, building on the progress to date, we will continue to fight to fully restore Northern Ireland’s place within the United Kingdom, including removing the application of EU law in our country and the internal Irish Sea border which it creates.
PROTECTING AGAINST ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION.
Campaigning to ensure Northern Ireland is fully protected in law against illegal immigration and that Northern Ireland is part of a United Kingdom wide immigration policy that works.
DELIVERING IN THE CONSTITUENCY.
Delivering an unrivalled, dedicated and professional constituency advice service to constituents where the issues that matter to you will be championed and help provided when you, or those you know, need it.
Promoting the Union.
The Democratic Unionist Party has an experienced and unrivalled track record of making the Pro-Union case for Northern Ireland in Parliament. Through our negotiations with the Government, the DUP has secured meaningful, visible and practical proposals to deepen connections throughout our United Kingdom, whilst driving forward the Northern Ireland economy. This includes: the establishment of a new U.K East- West Council to foster deeper links for Northern Ireland as part of the Union across business, education and culture; the creation of Intertrade UK to boost, and remove barriers to, trade throughout the United Kingdom; a twinning programme for primary schools, enabling students from Northern Ireland to benefit from opportunities across the Union.
Broadband.
Northern Ireland is on course to be the first region in Europe to have 100 per cent fibre broadband availability because of £150 million delivered by DUP MPs. A recent Ofcom report, Connected Nations, found that 91 per cent of all premises in Northern Ireland have access to full-fibre broadband, making it by far the best-connected region within the British Isles.
Pensions Triple Lock.
The DUP made the retention of the triple lock on pensions a key pillar of our Confidence and Supply Agreement with the Government in 2017. In the last Parliament, we have continued to stress the importance of this guaranteed protection for pensioners across the United Kingdom.
Jobs and Growth.
DUP MPs have secured significant investment for driving growth, creating jobs and generating prosperity in every corner of Northern Ireland. This included: working with UK Ministers to unlock £350 million from the Government for the Belfast Region City Deal, which will create up to 20,000 new jobs, build new world- class visitor experiences and support the regeneration of our towns and cities; achieving significant progress toward a Heads of Terms agreement for the Londonderry and Strabane City Deal and the Mid South West and Causeway Coast and Glens Growth deals; £150 million in UK Government funding for creating and underpinning an Enhanced Investment Zone in Northern Ireland, to boost growth and attract investment; securing a new £10 million fund to boost investment in strategically important ports linking Northern Ireland and Great Britain.
Our Record of Delivering for Northern Ireland at Westminster.
Help with Energy Costs and Household Bills.
DUP Parliamentarians ensured all households in Northern Ireland received the Government’s £600 energy support payment and benefited from discounted bills under the Energy Price Guarantee.
They also supported the ‘Essentials Guarantee’ campaign launched by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and Trussell Trust, which seeks to ensure that, at a minimum, Universal Credit protects people from going without essentials.
Stronger Communities.
The DUP team at Westminster has successfully fought for vital funding to strengthen local communities and support those who find themselves in challenging circumstances. This included: delivering a £20 million funding package for town centre regeneration in Coleraine and Londonderry; securing tens of millions of pounds in Levelling Up funding for local projects, including the redevelopment of Dundonald International Ice Bowl; fighting for, and delivering, £15 million in emergency support from the UK Government to support flood recovery schemes in Northern Ireland; successfully lobbying the Development for Levelling Up and Department for Communities to fund and launch a scheme to address Non-ACM (Aluminium Composite Material) cladded buildings in Northern Ireland, post-Grenfell.
Better Infrastructure.
DUP MPs secured almost £5 million through the Union Connectivity Review to progress plans for the electrification of the railway from Belfast to the Border and allowing Translink to deliver feasibility studies to: o reopen the Antrim-Lisburn railway line, with an additional stop at Belfast International Airport; o re-instate the Portadown to Armagh railway line.
They also obtained a Government commitment to improving the connections between Northern Ireland and Great Britain, including through the A75 in Scotland.
More for Public Services.
DUP Leader Gavin Robinson was the first MP to campaign for change on how Northern Ireland is funded. It is now accepted that going forward the Treasury’s contribution to public services in Northern Ireland must be on the basis of assessed need. The DUP has led where others have followed and we will continue to seek to address the legacy of chronic underfunding across our government departments.
Levelling Up.
The DUP has challenged, and will continue to challenge, the Government to remedy low levels of financial support awarded to projects in Northern Ireland under the UK Shared Prosperity Fund and press for a remedy to the lack of a formal appeals process.
Roll-out of the Armed Forces Covenant.
Brave men and women from Northern Ireland make an invaluable contribution to the Armed Forces both at home and abroad. They and their families deserve to be treated fairly and equitably in the provision of key services. In the last term, DUP MPs: supported the Armed Forces Act 2021, delivering on our pledge to ensure the Armed Forces Covenant was legally protected in Northern Ireland as in other parts of the United Kingdom; insisted on the appointment of a Northern Ireland Veterans’ Commissioner to act as an independent point of contact for, and support, service families locally.
More for Defence.
DUP Leader Gavin Robinson promoted the significant contribution Spirit Aerospace, Thales, Harland and Wolff and other companies in the Aerospace, Defence, Security and Space sectors play in creating high-quality and high-paid jobs in Northern Ireland. He has campaigned to deliver significant Ministry of Defence contracts to help secure their future.
The DUP also secured a Government commitment to launch a review into Northern Ireland’s role in the UK defence network. This review will: o look to increase public and commercial awareness of the Northern Ireland defence sector; o develop proposals to ensure Northern Ireland is benefiting from investment in defence industries in the same way as other parts of the UK; o explore how to leverage Northern Ireland’s cyber security clusters and academic centres of excellence; o build on established R&D programmes; o examine how a steady pipeline of highly-qualified graduates in science, technology, engineering and mathematics can generate military and security capabilities.
Building on our agreement with the previous Government that the United Kingdom’s 2% NATO defence spending target should continue to be met, DUP MPs continued to pursue an upward trajectory in defence expenditure during the last term. The latest NATO figures show that the UK spent an estimated 2.3% of GDP on defence in 2023.
Strengthening British Citizenship.
The DUP introduced the British Nationality (Irish Citizens) Bill to ensure people born in the Republic of Ireland who have lived in Northern Ireland or other parts of the United Kingdom for at least five years can claim British citizenship without the need for tests and fees. This legislation was supported by the Government and became law in May 2024.
Muckamore Abbey Public Inquiry.
DUP Leader Gavin Robinson was at the forefront of bringing allegations of abuse and ill-treatment of patients at Muckamore Abbey Hospital to public attention. The DUP successfully fought for the establishment and commencement of a public inquiry and continues to advocate for increased resources to ensure this work, and the police investigations, continues.
Infected Blood Scandal.
The DUP in Parliament has supported calls for comprehensive compensation for the victims of the infected blood scandal. Our MPs signed an Early Day Motion in July 2023, which recognised the government’s initial actions in making interim compensation payments and called for urgent further compensation for those affected. When this issue was raised in Parliament, our MPs have ensured that Northern Ireland and its citizens were represented.
Down’s Syndrome given Minority Status.
DUP Parliamentarians have been a committed and consistent voice for people with disabilities. One of our MPs co-sponsored the Down Syndrome Act 2022, the world’s first piece of legislation recognising people with Down’s syndrome as a specific minority group.
Justice for NI Sub-Postmasters.
DUP MPs successfully fought to extend legislation exonerating sub-postmasters wrongly convicted as a result of the Horizon IT scandal to Northern Ireland.
Religious Freedom.
DUP MPs have been consistent advocates for freedom of religion or belief both in the United Kingdom and across the globe.
They have: worked with Open Doors and other non- government organisations to throw a spotlight on the persecution of Christians internationally; supported the International Freedom of Religion or Belief Bill in Parliament; endorsed the appointment of a special envoy for freedom of religion and belief; sought additional protections to ensure government procurement takes cognisance of international human rights underpinning freedom of religion.
We will build on this record to ensure that the rights of those of all faiths and none are protected across the United Kingdom.
Pro-Life.
DUP MPs continued to adopt an unequivocal and determined pro-life stance in Parliament, opposing the commissioning of, and funding for, abortion services in Northern Ireland. One of our MPs chaired the pro-life All-Party Parliamentary Group.
Automated External Defibrillators.
A DUP MP brought forward a 10-minute rule motion on Automated External Defibrillators (Public Access) Bill 2022- 23 with regards to securing public access defibrillators in schools and new public buildings. This was accepted and implemented by the government with funding attached.
GCSE in Sign Language.
DUP MPs supported plans to consult on the introduction of British Sign Language as a GCSE qualification in schools in England, whilst campaigning for similar steps to be considered in Northern Ireland.
Baby Loss Certificates.
DUP MPs worked closely with colleagues in the Assembly to seek the introduction of a Baby Loss Certificate scheme in Northern Ireland on a similar basis to England.
Working together from Westminster, at Stormont and in local government, the DUP has the strength, depth and experience to deliver for communities across Northern Ireland. Since the restoration of devolution in February, DUP Ministers have been to the forefront of delivering results for households, businesses and workers.
Department for Communities.
Outcomes Delivered: 
Announced the way forward for a sign language bill, ensuring that deaf people have the same rights and opportunities as those in the hearing community; Help for working families by launching the ‘Intermediate Rent’ product, where a long-term low interest loan is offered to an operator to develop a new supply of affordable homes for rent at 20% discount off market value; Approved the Northern Ireland Football Fund – a £36 million fund of investment into performance clubs, grassroots clubs and a National Training Centre; Introduced legislation for defective premises - a bill introduced by accelerated passage to ensure homeowners in Northern Ireland enjoy the protections offered elsewhere in the UK, as highlighted by the case of Victoria Square apartments; Launched a new low interest loan scheme for the Voluntary, Community & Social Enterprise sector to develop capital projects to tackle social need, such as the funding of a new 3G pitch for Crusaders; Introduced legislation to keep Northern Ireland in line with the rest of the UK on pensions and reduce the lower age limit for auto enrolment and increasing the amount of qualifying earnings allowing more young people to start saving earlier; Introduced legislation to introduce a Pensions Dashboard – a digital service which will allow individuals to see their pensions information (including State pension) in one place online; Progress on an Anti-Poverty and Fuel Poverty Strategy, so that more people are helped into work and that we can drive down poverty in Northern Ireland; Introduced legislation for better protections to parents using Child Maintenance Services; Progress on a Disability and Work Strategy, ensuring no one who wants to work is prohibited from doing so because of their disability; Increased the upper property value limit for Co-Ownership Housing, so that more people can be supported into home ownership; Hosted the UK Sports Minister in Northern Ireland to highlight the need that exists in local sport; Allocated additional funding in 2023/24: o £1 million on library books; o £100,000 towards musical instrument grants; o £3 million supporting people programme – helping vulnerable people to live independently.
Launch of consultation to reduce the threshold for charity registration to reduce bureaucracy and burdens on smaller local charities.