2. Putting You First - Delivering Fair and Equitable Funding for our NHS, and other Public Services.
The DUP believes underfunding has systematically destroyed Northern Ireland’s capacity to provide frontline services that are fit for the 21st century.
Northern Ireland has the highest proportion of public sector workers in the United Kingdom. Only Scotland’s population is more dispersed. Yet when it comes to distributing money under the Barnett Formula, Northern Ireland receives less than it needs to match public services in England. That means money for health reform and pay awards simply does not go far enough. It means the money to repair our roads and increase school budgets does not exist. Meanwhile Scotland continues to receive more than it needs and Wales benefits from the protection of a funding floor.
The Democratic Unionist Party has led the charge for a new needs-based funding model for Northern Ireland.
Our campaign is now mainstream and the Government has been forced to accept a new definition of need going forward. However, fundamental problems remain unresolved.
While the other parties welcomed the financial package presented by the Government on the return of devolution earlier this year, the DUP made it clear that what was offered fell well short of what was required to put our public finances on a stable footing.
The failure to baseline the new formula from the CSR period in 2022, will lead to a further cliff edge in just two years’ time. At that point funding levels will again drop below what is required to fairly and sustainably fund services on a comparable basis to those in England – and potentially stay there for decades.
The DUP believes this situation is unacceptable. It will only be avoided by reaching agreement on a new, responsible, long-term fiscal framework that equitably funds our public services.
In the next Parliament, DUP MPs will press the next Government to ensure that funding cannot drop below the definition of assessed need in NI - £124 for every £100 spent in England.
We will also campaign for Northern Ireland’s baseline funding to be increased proportionately by the same amount above need as the Government applied to Wales with a new needs-based factor and 5% transitional uplift. Collectively this will be worth hundreds of millions of pounds in additional resources for our government departments every year moving forward.
Building a Better Health Service The DUP believes our National Health Service is the jewel in the crown of the Union and must be prioritised throughout the United Kingdom.
In the last term, DUP MPs have sought to improve access for patients in Northern Ireland to NHS services and treatments available in other parts of the United Kingdom. This included pursuing greater access for women seeking surgery for endometriosis, campaigning on rare diseases and ensuring Cystic Fibrosis sufferers have access to wonder drug Orkambi.
We have also recognised the need to end disparities between arrangements benefiting health staff working in Northern Ireland and the rest of the United Kingdom. This is essential for the delivery of primary care in particular, for skills retention, as well as for wider reforms of health and social care.
Going forward, DUP MPs will campaign to:  drive waiting lists down - fostering large-scale partnerships between health and social care in NI and national independent providers or not-for-profit organisations;  provide fellowships for young GPs in substantive posts;  commission a practitioner health scheme;  provide a permanent state-backed scheme for indemnity for GPs;  ensure a fair and equitable approach to pensions and residence for qualified GPs seeking to live and work in the United Kingdom;  establish clusters of universities, business and clinicians throughout the UK to harness and accelerate the use of new medical technology and diagnostics;  support accessible and portable health information throughout a patient’s life;  tackle the harm caused by smoking and vaping, including through exploring alternative options such as raising the age of sale to 21. Any restriction of the right of adults to make choices must always be justified.
We have been committed to improving care and support for those with a terminal illness. Two of our MPs, Party Leader Gavin Robinson and Carla Lockhart, are members of the Dying Well APPG. They have:  supported a change in the law to allow those with a life expectancy of up to 12 months to get faster and easier access to certain benefits and pensions;  promoted better quality and better access to palliative care so people across the United Kingdom can have a valued end-of-life experience.
The DUP will continue to press for enhanced provision for families affected by terminal diagnoses. We will also firmly oppose efforts to legalise assisted suicide.
Public Sector Pay The DUP is alarmed that pay awards for public sector staff have not kept pace with other parts of the United Kingdom. This is another symptom of chronic underfunding of our public services from Westminster.
Our nurses, doctors, police officers and teachers deserve to receive fair pay and conditions for the vital work that they do. It is wrong that too many of our best public servants are now employed by agencies rather than the public sector.
DUP MPs will:  engage in discussions with the UK Government about public sector pay across the UK, including as part of a new fiscal framework for Northern Ireland;  campaign for recurrent funding to provide decent pay awards;  support strategies to improve occupational support and attract, recruit, train and retain frontline staff; Civil Service Reform.
The DUP values the work and contribution of our dedicated civil servants. However, we feel that a lack of requisite skills, expertise and senior leadership in the Northern Ireland Civil Service has contributed significantly to the lack of progress in delivering key infrastructure projects in Northern Ireland, such as the York Street Interchange and the A5, in recent years.
The Northern Ireland Civil Service is different to its counterparts in Scotland and Wales. Whereas the civil service in Scotland and Wales remain part of the UK Home Civil Service, NICS Civil Service is a stand- alone body and as a result has been unable, and at times unwilling, to benefit from economies of scale in terms of skills present in the public sector in Great Britain.
We sought to tackle this during our negotiations with the Government. The Safeguarding the Union command paper sets out a programme for skills exchange between the NICS and the UK Home Civil Service. Encouraging those secondments and movement across all parts of the UK will boost capacity and help bring specific expertise to projects where necessary.
The DUP will seek the faithful implementation of these schemes, the expansion of short-term placements and the recruitment of more external experts to achieve better outcomes within our civil service. Northern Ireland is well placed to benefit from greater integration with the Home Civil Service.
. Campaigning to Protect Family Incomes.
As the cost-of-living crisis continues to place new and significant pressures on household budgets, the DUP is clear that Government should do more to protect incomes, ensure taxation is fair, with more remaining in the pockets of working people, and ensuring that wages are able to lift more people out of poverty.
DUP MPs will campaign to:  oppose the freeze on the personal tax allowance and higher rate income tax threshold;  seek further reductions in national insurance, building on consecutive cuts in the last Parliament;  support an increase in the starting age for employee national insurance;  encourage the Government to explore the merits of moving to single tax on all income, replacing income tax and national insurance;  support the uprating of benefits in line with inflation;  continue to support rises to the national living wage;  maintain the national minimum wage above two-thirds of median income;  freeze Vehicle Excise Duty and look to better link future rates to road use;  abolish VAT on domestic electricity bills;  maintain the freeze on fuel duty;  tackle the soaring cost of motor insurance by: • opposing any increase in Insurance Premium Tax; • supporting a UK-wide investigation into fairness of insurance industry practices – to include reviewing the role of Financial Conduct Authority.
Easing the Burden on Families The DUP continues to stand on the side of families across Northern Ireland, many of whom are feeling the squeeze as a result of high childcare bills and soaring costs for basic goods such as food and utilities.
DUP MPs:  supported legislation which would see the thresholds for child benefit be determined by household income instead of individual income. This helped force the Government into increasing the point at which this benefit begins to be clawed back, bringing relief to working families.
 campaigned for an increase in the Tax- Free Childcare Allowance;  proposed scrapping VAT on school uniforms; In the next Parliament, we will support proposals to:  increase the Tax-Free Childcare allowance from 20% to 35%;  remove the cap on Tax Free Childcare (TFC) above £2,000;  implement an ‘Essential Guarantee’ in Universal Credit, ensuring the standard allowance cannot reduce below a legal minimum amount required to afford basic essentials;  remove the two-child limit on Universal Credit for -and 4-child households;  scrap VAT on school uniforms;  apply the High-Income Child Benefit charge on the basis of household, rather than individual, income.
Childcare for Working Parents The lack of access to affordable, flexible and high-quality childcare has a negative impact on employment and recruitment and retention of staff in frontline services in particular. In many cases, parents are working reduced or condensed hours, or not all, in order to meet childcare needs, due to cost and availability of alternative provision. For this reason, the DUP Education Minister Paul Givan MLA has announced a fresh package of measures worth £25 million designed to:  stabilise and support expansion of the early learning and childcare sector;  offer all children 22.5 hours pre-school education per week, and;  reduce childcare bills for working parents through a Northern Ireland Childcare Subsidy Scheme.
At this election, DUP candidates are supporting the need for flexible childcare work policies that are co-designed with parents, teachers and employers. If elected, they will:  work with employers and HMRC to incentivise the Workplace Nursery Model in NI, including through removing unnecessary complexity;  promote access to capital grants for businesses and employers seeking to establish workplace nursery sites.
Pensions The DUP believes the next government should be in the business of helping people to plan for, and secure, a good income in retirement. Importantly that means encouraging saving, developing a culture of saving, and also enabling employees to get more value out of their pension pots.
The DUP has consistently opposed attempts to dismantle or dilute the triple lock on pensions. Our MPs have also been to the forefront of the campaign for redress by thousands of WASPI women in Northern Ireland who were mistreated by the Department of Work and Pensions in relation to changes to the State Pension Age. This has included being incredibly vocal on the need for government to urgently progress a scheme for compensation.
Going forward, we will:  act to support the Triple Lock on state pensions;  support the personal allowance for pensioners always being above the amount of the state pension;  oppose any further rise in the state pension age;  support a review of auto-enrolment, whilst ensuring no additional costs for business;  campaign to ensure Northern Ireland receives necessary funding to address age discrimination identified in the McCloud judgement relating to changes to public service pensions;  continue to seek suitable compensation and fair transitional State Pension arrangements for women born in the 1950s;  support small business owners to fund their retirement by retaining Business Asset Disposal Relief and keeping the value of relief in line with increases to the standard lifetime allowance for pensions.
A Brighter Future for our Young People The DUP is committed to ensuring our children and young people not only have the best start in life but the opportunities required to fulfil their potential and play a full part in our society.
DUP MPs will campaign to:  deliver increased economic and educational opportunities for young people by building relationships across the United Kingdom, including through the U.K East-West Council;  promote a joined-up approach to educational under-achievement across our four nations, with a focus on adult numeracy;  reduce disparities in support between under-20s who undertake apprenticeships and those in this age group who remain in school or education, including through retaining child benefit or subsidising travel costs;  reintroduce financial incentives for businesses that hire young apprentices at risk of long-term unemployment;  promote apprenticeships as part of a strategy for supporting young people leaving care;  seek to address the soaring cost of motor insurance for young people, including through exploring the potential for measures such as: • graduated driving licences; • a restriction on the number of young passengers; • a lower blood alcohol limit for young drivers.
4. Unleashing our Full Economic Potential.
The Democratic Unionist Party has been, and remains, committed to growing the Northern Ireland economy. We want to see an ambitious approach taken toward creating more and better jobs, which in turn will lead to greater prosperity for all of our people.
Between 2007 and 2021, the DUP has helped create 50,000 jobs and ensure we punched well above our weight within the UK in terms of securing record levels of investment.
In the last five years alone, we have unlocked more funding for City and Growth deals, attracted major defence contracts to our shores and scaled up efforts to make Northern Ireland a hub within the United Kingdom for advanced and low-carbon manufacturing as well as a global leader in hydrogen technology and production. However, this is not the limit of our ambitions.
Small and Medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs) The DUP values the diverse mix of SMEs across all sectors of the Northern Ireland economy. We want to increase the number of SMEs established, growing and competing globally as part of our vision to make Northern Ireland one of the elite, small and open economies in the world.
However, if this is to be achieved, and if we are to help them to reach their full potential, we must first address the challenges that are threatening the survival of many of these businesses.
DUP MPs will campaign to:  increase the VAT threshold for SMEs to £100,000 and then uprate it in line with inflation;  drive up the number of SMEs benefiting from government procurement spend, tax reliefs and business support;  protect cash flow for SMEs by tackling late payments to small suppliers as part of government contracts;  ensure national insurance liability for small businesses is fair - the Employment Allowance should be uprated in line with increases to the national living wage;  promote greater awareness of capital allowances and R&D reliefs among local businesses;  seek to reduce retail crime by creating a standalone offence for assaults on staff.
Regulation of Online Marketplaces It is wrong that that online giants and marketplaces can undercut shops on our high streets, who often pay more in rates than those online retailers pay in taxes. The DUP believes there should be a step change in how government regulates this area, particularly given that working families have been expected to lose more of their income in taxes than previous generations.
We will:  explore the potential introduction of an online sales tax targeting online corporates and marketplaces;  support robust efforts to crack down on global tax evading corporations.
VAT The DUP wants to see the Value Added Tax system better utilised to incentivise investments that promote improved productivity through low-carbon and green technologies. We will also continue to campaign for a reduction in VAT for hospitality across the United Kingdom in order to address the comparative disadvantage facing local businesses as a result of a reduced rate in the Irish Republic.
Research and Development It is clear that the United Kingdom’s national target for research and development has lacked ambition. Statistics indicate that the official target of 2.4% of GDP by 2027 has already been exceeded, yet R&D intensity lags well behind that achieved in other leading nations, including Germany and the United States. That should change.
DUP MPs would back proposals to:  increase the official target for UK Research & Development spend to at least .0% of GDP by 2027 and to a G7- leading intensity by 2030;  support long-term ambitious innovation programmes benefiting all parts of the UK;  expand UK Research & Development tax relief for small and medium sized enterprises to include capital expenditure;  review how Innovate UK grants are administered to increase opportunities for local input and take account of the needs of industry and institutions here;  require universities to provide up-front clarity on Intellectual Property ownership before conducting joint R&D activity with businesses and students.
Boosting Trade and Exports At the last election, the DUP set out a clear vision to better incorporate Northern Ireland’s export potential into it’s trade ambitions by employing more staff, greater advertising and ramping up the number of trade missions to benefit local firms and producers. Progress has been achieved in this with Invest NI’s global footprint expanded with the support of UK Government funding and more trade advisers recruited. We want to see the next Government go even further.
In particular, we will:  support the development a new UK export strategy with a specific trade plan for NI;  seek government funding to help expand NI’s trade presence across the world, including through recruitment of more staff;  make support by trade advisors locally more accessible and tailored to the ambitions of those seeking to export goods and services outside of the UK;  seek to provide export vouchers to help firms with the costs of exporting to a new market for the first time or for travel to international trade shows in new or emerging markets;  aim to strengthen links between the Department for Business and Trade and Invest NI to grow export sales, including consideration of a more visible presence in NI;  pursue an increase in the level of digital exports;  work toward the implementation of a Single Trade Window for imports and exports;  seek to ensure Northern Ireland’s interests, export potential, and the barriers facing traders locally, are reflected by the Government in the review of the UK/EU Trade and Co- operation Agreement in 2026;  aim to review the monitoring and evaluation framework used by the Department for Business and Trade to monitor its export promotion activities;  pursue further discussions with the Government on extending the benefits of the freeports programme to Northern Ireland.
Advanced Manufacturing The DUP is focused on unleashing the potential of emerging economic sectors that are best placed to add value to the Northern Ireland economy. We will consolidate Northern Ireland’s place as a global destination for investment within the United Kingdom. Advanced manufacturing and engineering are among the most productive local sectors, with job creation and survival rates for new firms higher than those in the wider economy.
DUP MPs will press for a new national industrial strategy in which advanced manufacturing and other thriving sectors, including digital, agri-tech, life and health sciences and fintech - are prioritised through effective support, fair regulation and have the certainty to plan, expand and innovate. We will also press the Government to retain the Full Expensing rules for capital investment.
Skills.
The DUP believes that a failure to invest in, and strengthen, Northern Ireland’s skills base holds our economy back and represents missed opportunities to create jobs and lift more people out of poverty.
We are committed to putting into action strategies which adopt a sustainable and sustained approach to identifying and meeting skills shortages in key and emerging sectors of our economy and throughout public services.
DUP MPs will:  support the establishment of an Independent UK Skills Commission with representation for Northern Ireland and the other devolved regions. This body would be tasked with assessing our current and future labour needs, with a remit to scrutinise policy and decisions taken at national and devolved level;  press the next Government to use the tax system to incentivise businesses to upskill and re-skill employees in skills shortage areas.
Apprenticeships.
The DUP remains committed to replacing the Apprenticeship Levy with a new system that ensures ringfenced contributions by employers and government are reinvested in skills. DUP Economy Ministers led on an Apprenticeship Recovery Package during the Covid period to minimise apprenticeship job losses, maintain and grow the supply of apprenticeships.
Any new training levy must be co-designed with the private sector and deliver opportunities for businesses to attract and upskill their workforce irrespective of sector or size. It must also be flexible as our economy pivots toward green growth and other exciting fast-growing industries.
The quality of apprenticeship training in Northern Ireland is already extraordinarily high and that is testament to those delivering these schemes day in day out.
However, our apprenticeships and skills offering needs to evolve and keep pace with demand for skills both across industry and in frontline services.
In driving this forward, DUP MPs will seek to:  deliver more all-age, public sector and SME-led apprenticeships;  ensure funding arrangements enable those undertaking apprenticeships to work anywhere in the United Kingdom;  promote a consistent approach to the design of the curriculum for apprenticeships across the UK, ensuring employers of all sizes are equipped to deliver this training;  increase female representation in STEM apprenticeships;  continue to explore the potential introduction of a Nursing Higher Level Apprenticeship Framework;  ensure the drive to expand apprenticeships is part of a joined-up approach to careers advice.
Access to Labour The DUP welcomes the fact those coming from the EU and the rest of the world to work in Northern Ireland are now treated on the same basis. However, the current system of work visas has proven ineffective in responding to the pressing needs of businesses and employers across the United Kingdom.
There are particular concerns in Northern Ireland about labour shortages in key industries such as agri-food and hospitality, whilst for many smaller businesses the costs of accessing the system have effectively cut off this route to meeting the growth needs of their company.
We will promote a more agile and responsive migration system.
DUP MPs will seek:  a review of the structure and operation of the Migration Advisory Committee (MAC). This should include consideration of formal representation from the devolved regions and how a reformed MAC could work in partnership with a new Independent Skills Commission to map and meet labour shortages across the UK;  progress on the recommendations of the Independent Review into Labour Shortages in the Food Supply Chain, including ensuring Northern Ireland benefits from a new comprehensive strategy to enhance the sector’s attractiveness;  to ensure fair minimum salary thresholds for skilled overseas workers to protect food production, manufacturing, hospitality and the provision of health and social care. The current threshold is £38,700, well above the average salary in NI;  a multi-year rolling seasonal workers scheme for agriculture with a suitable length visa;  to make it easier for international students qualifying in primary care roles, such as GPs, to gain permanent residence - ensuring our Health Service can realise the full benefit of increasing the number of training places.
Access to Finance The DUP recognises that many businesses are struggling to keep their heads above water because of increasing costs and higher interest rates. We believe banks and financial institutions need to do more to support their customers in these challenging times. This is particularly the case for those in the agri-food chain, who are facing spiralling input costs coupled with slim price margins, and SMEs, who are often dissuaded from borrowing by the need to put up significant personal guarantees.
DUP MPs will support:  the extension of the Growth Guarantee Scheme, providing a 70% guarantee to participating lenders on finance provided to SMEs, for the duration of the next Parliament;  encouraging banks and lenders to provide additional low-cost finance options for firms across the UK;  a review of small business lending, with an emphasis on assessing the impact of unnecessary personal guarantees on investment by SMEs;  bringing more small businesses under the scope of the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) consumer duty and Financial Ombudsman Service (FOS).
Banking Hubs.
Recent years have seen a large number of bank branches closing in towns and villages across Northern Ireland, indeed across the whole of the United Kingdom. This impacts older people, the vulnerable and those living in rural areas, where banks have been a visible part of the social fabric.
The DUP supports protecting access to cash and other banking services for those who are less likely to use online services, as well as the businesses and high streets impacted by decreased footfall. That should include the provision of an ATM or cash point in each of our towns and villages.
Northern Ireland’s first banking hub has been established in Kilkeel. It is a shared service that operates in a similar way to a standard branch, with a counter service run by Post Office staff where customers of almost any bank can withdraw and pay in cash, pay bills and carry out regular transactions.
The DUP will:  work with banks to establish more banking hubs on our high streets and town centres;  campaign to ensure government and financial institutions fund a scheme covering establishment costs for banking hubs;  support continuity of local branch services while an alternative model is in place.
Debanking.
The DUP will support tighter rules to protect businesses and consumers from having their bank account frozen and closed unfairly. There should be a substantive notice period before accounts can be closed and a requirement for banks to provide clear explanations for what they have chosen to do. Nobody should have their bank account closed because of their political views or because somebody else decides they are not politically correct.
Insurance.
The recent spikes in home and car insurance premiums have not just affected families. Businesses are deeply frustrated that insurance companies continue to generate huge profits, while they face increasing pressures on all fronts. The DUP will look to increase transparency in how insurance products are advertised, so businesses and consumers can make informed decisions. We will also support a market review into professional indemnity insurance (PII).
Corporation Tax.
In our 2022 Assembly Election manifesto, the DUP argued that the necessary capacity did not exist in the contemporary context of Northern Ireland to devolve additional fiscal powers. That remains our position at this time.
Lowering the rate of corporation tax in Northern Ireland has been a longstanding DUP policy. This would boost Northern Ireland as an attractive investment opportunity, building on the strength, skill and ingenuity of our workforce. The minimum effective 15% rate in the Irish Republic places firms in Northern Ireland at a competitive disadvantage and we want to see this addressed. We continue to advocate for a reduction in corporate tax across the United Kingdom and DUP MPs opposed the increase in the main UK corporation tax rate from 19% to 25% in 2023.
The DUP believes there are a number of fundamental issues that require resolution with the Treasury before the powers to vary corporation tax rates - which are already provided for in law - can be enacted. We are clear that progress must be based on solid foundations. That means ensuring a process of implementation that protects spending on public services in the short to medium-term.
5. A Strategic Role for UK Defence and Security.
The Democratic Unionist Party believes that now more than ever there is a need to strengthen the United Kingdom’s defence industrial base and grow our Armed Forces.
Putin’s abhorrent invasion of Ukraine and the proliferation of cyber threats from China, Iran and North Korea has demonstrated the importance of the UK being equipped with the military and intelligence capabilities to protect our national interests.
Without a vision to deter and respond to residual threats posed by those intent on undermining our democratic institutions and harming our citizens, we believe the UK’s role in a volatile and fast-changing global landscape will become increasingly precarious. The multi-faceted and ever- evolving nature of the challenges we face requires a constant appraisal of our Armed Forces and intelligence agencies to ensure they are not only fighting-fit but equipped with the right skillsets to respond in an agile and decisive fashion irrespective of the threat facing them.
DUP MPs will pursue the greater integration of Northern Ireland into our national defence structures, networks and operations. This is in keeping with the principle of consent and the Belfast Agreement. We support calls for the UK to use an increased RAF and Royal Navy presence in Northern Ireland to fortify its northwestern naval and air patrol presence.
This can act as a deterrent to attempts by Russia to target western critical undersea infrastructure around the UK, a threat which the Republic of Ireland also faces.
