Hydrogen.
Northern Ireland is fast emerging as an innovator in hydrogen technology. Many recognise that Northern Ireland is leading the world in terms of hydrogen usage in the transport sector. Companies such as Wrightbus are developing cutting-edge technologies which are revolutionising whole sectors. Indeed, it is estimated that it could in time meet approximately one-third of local energy needs.
The DUP has consulted key stakeholders to develop a Hydrogen Growth Strategy and we will continue to seize, exploit and maximise economic and social opportunities associated with hydrogen.
Our Province boasts a comparative advantage in this field because of our location and open coastlines, which present scope for off-shore wind technology and generation.
There is also an established, and growing, presence of local academia and entrepreneurs across Northern Ireland.
We will:  seek a dedicated Hydrogen Innovation Strategy;  support investing in skills via a new dedicated green hydrogen apprenticeship programme;  open discussions with the UK Government to consider funding streams and incentives for SME innovation in the hydrogen sector.
Energy Security.
The DUP remains committed to phasing out fossil fuels. The Energy Strategy brought forward by DUP Economy Ministers in the Executive contain a range of ambitious targets and policies to support the transition to safe, affordable and clean energy solutions in Northern Ireland.
We are clear that the status quo of importing and consuming fossil fuels at current levels is not sustainable. However, two thirds of homes are still heated by oil and in the interim, supplies of fossil fuels - including North Sea oil - will still be required unless we want our communities to go without basic services.
The DUP wants to see a strategic national approach to transforming the production of clean and renewable energy in all parts of the United Kingdom.
A National and Joined-Up Approach.
A national approach to co-design, delivery and monitoring of climate policy will be crucial in the next Parliament, as will ensuring there is an approach to enforcement that provides a level playing field across the United Kingdom.
Petrol/Diesel Ban Shifting public transport to alternative energies and away from diesel has been a DUP commitment for many years. This is a core component of the Path to Net Zero Energy Strategy delivered by DUP Economy Ministers in the Executive and we will lobby government to significantly increase investment in, and availability of, sustainable transport.
The DUP supports the decision to push back a ban on new petrol and diesel vehicles to at least 2035. We believe there should be a further review of these plans which takes account of the high upfront costs facing families to transition to electric vehicles, the practical impact on businesses and productivity, and the current postcode lottery of EV charging infrastructure availability.
