Defending Our Most Vulnerable Pro-Life.
The DUP is unashamedly pro-life and continues to oppose the radical abortion laws foisted on communities in Northern Ireland. Since 2019, DUP MPs have: 3 opposed the commissioning of abortion services in Northern Ireland and legal instruction from the Government to ringfence funding for this from the block grant; 3 supported legal action by disability campaigner Heidi Crowter against legislation allowing the abortion of babies with Down’s Syndrome up until birth; 3 opposed regulations foisting abortion on the Relationships and Sexuality Education curriculum in schools across Northern Ireland; 3 raised concerns regarding at-home abortion pills and possible coercion of women who take them without medical advice or support.
DUP MPs will continue to support legislation and policies that affirm the value and dignity of all life.
We do not believe prayer, including silent prayer, should be criminalised or regarded as anti-social behaviour. We will seek a review of Section 9 of the Public Order Act 2023 and the impact of Public Space Protection Orders on those who seek to reasonably express their pro-life beliefs in the public square.
Disabilities.
The DUP is committed to ensuring those with disabilities can live full and active lives.
We will continue to advocate for better access to, and provision of, vital services that can help ensure they can play a stronger role in their local communities and the labour market.
DUP MPs will: 3 support a wide-ranging audit of central and local government facilities to ensure they are accessible to those with disabilities; 3 work with the Inclusive Mobility and Transport Advisory Committee (IMTAC) in future transport projects; 3 promote close collaboration between IMTAC, the Disabled Persons Transport Advisory Committee (DPTAC) in England and Wales and Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland; 3 support the introduction of further resident parking zone schemes; 3 encourage government departments, public bodies and local authorities across the UK to join Access Able or require them to provide comparable information on disability access and services; 3 invest more in community transport, including services that provide a lifeline to older people.
Building a Better Health Service.
The DUP believes our National Health Service is the jewel in the crown of the Union and must be prioritised throughout the United Kingdom.
In the last term, DUP MPs have sought to improve access for patients in Northern Ireland to NHS services and treatments available in other parts of the United Kingdom. This included pursuing greater access for women seeking surgery for endometriosis, campaigning on rare diseases and ensuring Cystic Fibrosis sufferers have access to wonder drug Orkambi.
We have also recognised the need to end disparities between arrangements benefiting health staff working in Northern Ireland and the rest of the United Kingdom. This is essential for the delivery of primary care in particular, for skills retention, as well as for wider reforms of health and social care.
Going forward, DUP MPs will campaign to: 3 drive waiting lists down - fostering large-scale partnerships between health and social care in NI and national independent providers or not-for-profit organisations; 3 provide fellowships for young GPs in substantive posts; 3 commission a practitioner health scheme; 3 provide a permanent state-backed scheme for indemnity for GPs; 3 ensure a fair and equitable approach to pensions and residence for qualified GPs seeking to live and work in the United Kingdom; 3 establish clusters of universities, business and clinicians throughout the UK to harness and accelerate the use of new medical technology and diagnostics; 3 support accessible and portable health information throughout a patient’s life; 3 tackle the harm caused by smoking and vaping, including through exploring alternative options such as raising the age of sale to 21. Any restriction of the right of adults to make choices must always be justified.
We have been committed to improving care and support for those with a terminal illness. Two of our MPs, Party Leader Gavin Robinson and Carla Lockhart, are members of the Dying Well APPG. They have: 3 supported a change in the law to allow those with a life expectancy of up to 12 months to get faster and easier access to certain benefits and pensions; 3 promoted better quality and better access to palliative care so people across the United Kingdom can have a valued end-of-life experience.
The DUP will continue to press for enhanced provision for families affected by terminal diagnoses. We will also firmly oppose efforts to legalise assisted suicide.