Immigration.
The DUP supported an end to the free movement of people from European countries in the last Parliament. We remain committed to the aims of a firm, fair and controlled immigration system where the rules for those seeking to come to the United Kingdom are governed solely by our national parliament and are equally and fully applicable in all parts of the United Kingdom.
The courts have ruled that Government’s policy on sending illegal migrants to Rwanda cannot extend to Northern Ireland because of Article 2 of the Protocol. That risks making Northern Ireland a magnet for asylum seekers seeking to escape enforcement.
DUP MPs will: 3 fight to ensure national immigration and asylum policy applies equally across the United Kingdom by restoring Parliamentary sovereignty over the law in Northern Ireland; 3 support an approach that allows those fleeing war or persecution to find refuge in the United Kingdom, underpinned by: • renewed efforts to smash and deter crime gangs who profit from illegal and unsafe transports across the Channel; • a recognition that our neighbours and allies must do their fair share; • speedier and more efficient processes for dealing with asylum claims; • reviewing the impact of the Asylum Accommodation and Support Services Contracts on housing need and public services in all UK regions.
6. Backing our Farmers and Food Security The DUP recognises that farms and our rural communities are an integral part of the social and economic fabric of Northern Ireland.
We know that the challenges facing primary producers can, at times, take their toll on farm families, negatively impacting their health and wellbeing. DUP MPs will fight to ensure they receive the right support, and the proper recognition, going forward.
Direct Farm Support In the last term, the DUP team at Westminster secured a guarantee from the Government that the level of annual support provided for direct farm payments would be maintained at pre-2020 levels for the duration of the Parliament. We are committed to standing up for farmers and their businesses once again.
DUP MPs will: 3 seek an increased, ring-fenced and multi- annual farm support and development budget. This must, at a minimum, ensure that the annual level of funding provided by the Treasury is increased to match the impact of inflation - both in the period since 2020 and on an ongoing basis; 3 highlight the need for long-term, inflation-proof financial commitments to agriculture - including beyond a single parliamentary mandate - in order to provide certainty for businesses and industry Food Security.
The DUP believes food production should be recognised as a strategic national asset in the United Kingdom. The needs of our farmers cannot be sacrificed in favour of other policy objectives. Investing in agriculture and primary production is essential for boosting productivity, job creation and delivering progress toward environmental goals.
DUP MPs will: 3 pursue measures to make farm businesses more profitable, productive and resilient, as well as attractive to the next generation, with a particular focus on encouraging longer-term land leasing and rental arrangements through tax relief and by exploring alternative, additional options to the current con- acre system.
3 seek a national review of planning policy and law to unlock greater levels of on-farm investment for purposes of growing and processing fruit, vegetables, cultivating crops and improving animal welfare. This should include ensuring rules around permitted development and ammonia emissions adopt a long-term approach to delivering more sustainable farming practices.
