Active Travel.
The DUP will support improved, structured working between local, central and national government to improve active travel infrastructure, including through closely aligned active travel tourism strategies.
Waste and Circular Economy Ensuring waste is kept in the economy and not in our landscape holds economic benefits and can help promote a circular economy. Businesses reprocessing paper, plastics and glass from our households employ hundreds of people in local communities and add significant value to our economy. There is scope to grow and expand this sector by ensuring more material of sufficient quality is available within Northern Ireland.
In our view, that goal will not be achieved by a costly move to require households to sort their waste into as many as six bins.
The DUP supports a uniform method for household waste collection in Northern Ireland. We support keeping it simple to collect the highest recycling volumes and promote innovation in sorting technology.
This reduces cost for the taxpayer, drives higher volumes in recycling and promotes investment in the private sector.
In order to contribute to the 70% recycling rate for all waste in Northern Ireland by 2030, DUP MPs will work with the next Government to:  unlock funding for the circular economy in Northern Ireland through the National Interdisciplinary Circular Economy Research (NICER) programme;  encourage more businesses to adopt circular business models, with appropriate support and building on trailblazer firms such as Artemis Technologies and Frylite locally;  promote sustainability in design of goods, improve material efficiency and reduce waste;  seek to reduce the annual material footprint per person across the UK;  form clusters to raise awareness of responsible practices and promote best practice;  develop a circular economy monitoring framework for all parts of the UK;  embed circular economy principles at all levels of education.
Hydrogen.
Northern Ireland is fast emerging as an innovator in hydrogen technology. Many recognise that Northern Ireland is leading the world in terms of hydrogen usage in the transport sector.
Investing More in National Infrastructure.
Delivering high quality infrastructure will be the foundation of future growth across the United Kingdom. The DUP not only has a strong record of improving links between Great Britain and Northern Ireland but a clear vision for better connectivity nationally, throughout the British Isles and with the rest of the world.
Union Connectivity Review Since the 1950s, the Northern Ireland rail network has been cut by some 450 miles and there has been historical underinvestment compared to other regions of the United Kingdom. We do not have any railway electrification currently and there are clear disparities in access to services in specific areas, such as the North West.
The Union Connectivity Review recommended that the Government support the Executive in developing, funding and implementing a long-term pipeline of improvements to transport infrastructure.
Although progress to date has been modest, the Government has provided:  £. million to Translink to deliver a study on the cost, feasibility and value for money of electrification of the railway in Northern Ireland from Belfast to the border with the Irish Republic;  £700,000 for a feasibility study on reopening the Antrim-Lisburn railway line, with an additional stop at Belfast International Airport;  £800,000 to deliver a feasibility study on reinstating the Portadown to Armagh railway line.
This funding is extremely welcome, however the full realisation of these projects for the social and economic benefit of all communities in Northern Ireland require a step change from UK Ministers, both in terms of resourcing and project expertise with local departments and stakeholders.
A strengthened National Infrastructure Commission, with increased regional representation and fairer access to its skills and expertise for Northern Ireland, can play a key role in achieving the conditions necessary to scale-up and deliver NI’s infrastructure ambitions. Hosting a major infrastructure conference in Northern Ireland would also be a signal of the Government’s overriding commitment to strengthening connections and relationships between our four nations.
DUP MPs will pursue the full implementation of the Union Connectivity Review. We will also work closely with the Treasury to maximise the benefits of Financial Transactions Capital and better access to the UK Infrastructure Bank in order to turbocharge major infrastructure plans locally.
We will never apologise for prioritising improvements to connectivity to our single largest trade market in Great Britain. As part of our negotiations with the Government, we secured commitments to:  improving journeys on the A75 between Gretna and Stranraer, following the recommendations in the Union Connectivity Review, to alleviate pinch points on the road; providing better links between the Cairnryan ferry terminals serving Northern Ireland and southwest Scotland, connecting with the M6 and Cumbria, and the A77 towards Glasgow;  boosting port connections and infrastructure between NI and GB, including through £10m for infrastructure development.
These commitments are a practical demonstration of the importance of ensuring businesses and consumers in all regions can grasp the full economic potential and opportunity arising from membership of the United Kingdom.
The DUP believe there is no contradiction between our Pro-Union stance and support for growth-oriented and mutually beneficial expansion of transport links between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic.
There are clear synergies between the All-Island Rail Review and the Union Connectivity Review and the latter recommended that the Government provide funding and major project expertise for the purposes of delivering specific recommendations for cross-border rail. We will work with the Government to take forward this workstream in a way that promotes growth, jobs, housing and social cohesion for communities in Northern Ireland and right across the UK.
Air Connectivity.
The DUP is committed to strengthening Northern Ireland’s air connectivity with Great Britain and internationally.
Our MPs have also campaigned extensively for a solution which allows the reinstatement of duty-free shopping for flights between NI and the EU. Preventing airports and businesses in Northern Ireland from accessing this revenue stream - which can account for as much as 40% of an airport’s revenue - is unfair and places them at a competitive disadvantage to the rest of the UK.
DUP MPs will work the Government and at Stormont to design and deliver a new scheme to secure new and direct routes to Northern Ireland from European, transatlantic and Middle Eastern countries.
Delivering an attractive proposition to airlines on a sustainable basis will be crucial to securing more inward investment and inbound tourists, which will in turn provide a catalyst for jobs and prosperity in every corner of Northern Ireland.
Domestically, we continue to advocate for a more strategic approach to boosting regional linkages, including through ensuring updated plans for a potential third runway at Heathrow prioritise regional interconnection and provide opportunities for the construction industry in all parts of the United Kingdom.
In Parliament we will continue to advocate for the abolition of domestic air passenger duty, which disproportionately impacts competitiveness of our airports. A 50% cut is a welcome start but the next Government should do more to level up the regulatory environment for air routes and tourism in all parts of the UK.
