Climate Change & Energy.
Plaid Cymru recognises that the climate and nature emergencies are the biggest threat to mankind on a global scale, and reaffirms our commitment to reaching net- zero targets in Wales by 2035 and reversing biodiversity decline by 2030. This requires collaboration and planning to achieve a just transition.
We all have a part to play in tackling the global emergency. Forecasters have made clear that the world is on course to becoming an uninhabitable planet. Wales can and must play its part in ensuring that the world changes its course – and we must do this in a way that is equitable and just for generations now and in the future.
Plaid Cymru believes that greater investment is direly needed in green jobs and transitioning into new methods of construction, so that workers in Wales are not thrown on the scrap heap, but are supported into new, highly-skilled and well-paid jobs.
Plaid Cymru would prioritise work to alleviate the effects of climate change on our communities, and in ways that take account of the psychological as well as physical tolls of this crisis.
The school curriculum should equip young people with an understanding of climate challenges and encourage a philosophy of engaging with climate change and the natural world.
We will ensure that both the Welsh Government and the UK Government takes their responsibilities to protecting households seriously by investing in infrastructure to prevent or mitigate flooding incidents.
As a result of their impact in increasing climate change, we will increase Air Passenger Duty and kerosene tax for private jets.
 Control of our Natural Resources.
When it comes to powers over resources, we believe that the people of Wales should have full control over all of our natural resources, our waters and our lands.
We need to have energy independence for Wales so that we can achieve a fair green transition on our terms.
We believe that Wales should have full control over energy powers, without any upper limit or conditions set by the UK Government. It makes no sense for there to be a specific limit, currently 350MW of generation, meaning that there are two planning regimes in place and that major energy developments can be given consent by Westminster without the consent of people in Wales.
Plaid Cymru will ensure that Wales takes full control over the Crown Estate in Wales, which has already been devolved to Scotland but not yet to Wales.
Recent years have seen increased investment in Crown Estate energy projects in Wales’s waters and the benefits from these investments should be returned to Wales. These projects should be developed for the needs of Wales, rather than for extraction, and should be aligned with the electricity grid, planning system and other factors, to maximise positive outcomes for Wales. This includes the use of Welsh local supply chains in future contracts for renewable energy developments of the Welsh Crown Estate, developing and supporting our local industries.
This will become a Sovereign Wealth Fund for Wales, so that we invest the profits in our future generations.
Control of water in Wales would allow the Senedd to set higher environmental targets on water quality and lower prices, where possible.
The current scandal of water quality must be resolved and it should never be allowed to happen again. We would enact section 48(1) of the Wales Act 2017, which would fully align the Senedd’s legislative competence over water with the geographical boundary of Wales. We would also formally request powers from the UK over the licensing of sewage in Wales.
Developing our own Energy Plaid Cymru has long made the case for the establishment of our own national energy company, Ynni Cymru, which we succeeded in establishing through working with the Welsh Government.
This will expand community owned renewable energy generation across Wales, and we foresee a greater role for Ynni Cymru, as it develops in line with our aims for a Welsh-based energy company to serve the needs of the people of Wales - helping us to take control of our own natural resources and lowering energy bills.
Community energy is important in Wales. Plaid Cymru would push for changes to how the National Grid is structured, so that communities can benefit directly from local energy projects.
Wales is currently paying the price for a legacy of decades of underinvestment in the grid, resulting in large bottlenecks for connection to distribution and transmission networks and will not achieve its carbon reduction targets if this issue isn’t resolved.
We would push for changes to planning policies to give local communities a greater voice in determining what developments happen in their locality, and ensure that local voices are involved earlier in the planning stages of projects, so that local people have more say and ownership of these projects.
Preserving Wales’s Natural Landscape.
We believe that the beauty of Wales’s natural landscape should be preserved. This means that large scale industrial energy generation developments should take this into account. Large scale pylon developments or solar scale developments should be considered in the context of their impact, and alternative methods for linking renewable energy to the national grid should be implemented, e.g. through the undergrounding of cables.
Plaid Cymru opposes the development of new sites for nuclear power stations, and would oppose new licences for oil and gas drilling.
The legacy of coal mining continues to leave scars on our nation’s landscape.
Westminster benefited from the mining industry in the days before devolution, and they should bear the responsibility for making these sites safe. Plaid Cymru will push to ensure that Westminster pays towards clearing the coal tips that litter our valleys, and that site restoration does not have to be financed through the further extraction of coal.
The legacy of mining is also felt in the ongoing injustice faced by former miners whose pensions are benefiting the coffers of the Treasury, whilst some former miners live on only £10 a week. Plaid Cymru demands that the UK Government should relinquish its entitlement to the pension scheme’s investment reserve, and that they should transfer the billions already taken from the miners back to those former workers and their families.
The UK Government must commit to implementing the BEIS inquiry’s own recommendations into the Mineworkers’ Pension Scheme.
We would maintain the ban on fracking, are opposed to proposals for gas-fired peaking plants in Wales, and on new open cast coal mines.
Opencast mine sites should be fully restored for the benefit of local communities, and should never be used as a guise for private companies to undertake further coal extraction.
There should be stronger enforcement for the protection of Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) in Wales, so that the days of companies dumping waste on protected sites are a thing of the past.
Fairness for Energy The increase in energy bills in recent years has hugely affected households across the country, through rises in the price cap. The privatised energy market has patently failed.
There is no good reason why households in Wales, which produces more energy than it uses, have higher standing charges than in England. We would look to reduce these charges, saving money for all households.
We want to see the introduction of a Social Tariff for Energy. Although prices are expected to fall during the Summer, when energy use is lower, it is anticipated to rise again in the Autumn and Winter.
Plaid Cymru would devolve the responsibilities of Ofgem to regulate the design of whole-systems energy grids and markets which serve Wales, while aligning with emerging UK, European and global standards.
As part of this work, we would establish a Welsh energy systems operator.
We support a long-term plan for retrofitting existing properties that would make them more energy efficient, thereby reducing costs and carbon emissions. This will require government support, particularly while households are in such economically challenging circumstances, and requires investment and commitment to developing a skilled workforce capable of delivering this programme of works across the country.
Tackling the Nature Emergency.
The Nature Emergency is of great importance to Plaid Cymru, and our Senedd group led a debate in 2021 which resulted in our Senedd being the first parliament in the UK to declare a nature emergency. The loss of biodiversity and species will affect us all – and 1 in every 6 species in Wales is already threatened with extinction. We support a science-led plan aligned with the 2022 Kunming-Montreal agreement to ensure that nature loss is firmly in reverse as soon as possible.
Plaid Cymru supports the introduction of biodiversity targets, to halt biodiversity decline by 2030, and ensure substantive recovery by 2050.
The climate and nature emergencies must be tackled together. We would ensure that planning projects have to have regard to the two emergencies, to avoid situations like wind farms being built on landscapes that provide habitats for endangered species.
