Transport.
Fairness for Transport Plaid Cymru demands that Wales receives the £4bn of transport funding to which it is entitled under the Barnett Formula for money spent by the UK Government on HS2, which is clearly an England- only project.
Ambition for our Railways We believe that rail infrastructure should be devolved to Wales, as it is in Scotland and Northern Ireland, allowing rail infrastructure planning for Wales to be decided in Wales.
Only 1% of UK Government capital spend is on railways in Wales, reflecting both current and historical under- spend. While London and major cities in Scotland were connected by electrified railway more than fifty years ago, it is only in the past decade that Wales has even had a single mile of electrified track.
With that £4,000,000,000 additional funding, we could revolutionise our railway and transport systems, including properly connecting north and south Wales for the first time within Wales, reopening major railway lines closed under Beeching, electrifying the North Wales Main Line, improving existing railway services, and increasing and improving services west of Swansea.
To do that, Wales needs an ambitious travel plan that also considers public transport connections in the south Wales Valleys and other areas of Wales which do not have existing rail connections – including by use of trams or light rail.
“With that £4,000,000,000 additional funding, we could revolutionise our railway and transport systems including properly connecting north and south Wales for the first time within Wales”  Nationalising our Public Transport Services.
On both a Welsh and UK level, we believe that the railways should be re-nationalised so that it acts on behalf of its users, rather than shareholders, and allows for greater alignment of services.
We would also favour the renationalisation of major bus services, and would seek to integrate bus and rail services so that they work for the benefit of passengers. We believe that bus routes should be determined by the needs of passengers, not only what is commercially attractive to private companies. As a first step, we support the regulation of buses.
In the context of climate change and changing people’s transport habits, public transport services in Wales must be of sufficient quality to encourage people to use them – that means frequency of service, reliability in being on time and of high quality so that users feel safe and comfortable.
New housing developments around Wales need to show that they have sufficiently future-proofed for growth in public transport, both in terms of generating and responsive to demand.
Supporting our Bus Services.
Bus services have been under-funded by the Labour Welsh Government following Covid, leading to major cuts in the past year.
In particular, this is an issue in more rural parts of the country, where local bus services are already infrequent, often finishing early in the day. We will review the cuts in subsidy to bus companies that has led to services cuts that make it difficult for people to go to work, shop or catch up with friends by bus.
This includes services such as the flexible on-demand Bwcabus in Carmarthenshire, Ceredigion and Pembrokeshire, and we will continue to support the TrawsCymru network which links communities where rail connections do not exist.
A Young Person’s Bus Pass We will keep the Older People’s Bus Pass in Wales, and investigate a similar scheme for Young People, encouraging them to get used to using public transport, wherever they are in Wales.
Passenger Safety.
Passenger safety is an integral part of public transport. We will place a statutory duty on public transport companies to guarantee passengers can get to the destination, or a place of safety. This includes developing more consistent and transparent systems for reporting and recording incidents of abuse that affect women and vulnerable people on public transport, and for improving lighting and bilingual audio announcements for all public transport services, on board and at stops/stations and in streets immediately surrounding train stations and major bus stops. We would fight to ensure that guards are kept on train services throughout Wales.
Active Travel.
As well as investing in public transport, more active travel options have to be provided if we are to persuade people to make less use of their cars.
Plaid Cymru supports investment in active travel routes, and would ensure that changes to roads policy happen at the same time as increased investment in our public transport systems.
The need to change the way we travel is abundantly clear.
Air pollution is leading to an increase in asthma and lung conditions amongst children and dementia in the older population. We support clear air zones near major centres of population, and traffic calming measures to increase road safety.
 Road Safety.
Road safety is a crucial part of daily life in Wales, whether as a driver of passenger.
Unfortunately, many accidents on the road are due to careless driving. We will identify roads which have a higher than anticipated number of accidents and work with local government and Welsh Government, whichever is responsible, to make changes to make them safer and reduce accidents.
This can include additional signage, changes to road layout, as well as investment in average speed cameras.
While Plaid Cymru supports the principle of the introduction of the 20mph speed zone across roads in Wales in order to reduce the number of accidents and life-changing injuries, we believe that it was poorly implemented by the Labour Welsh Government. We support a review to ensure it is working successfully across Wales in reducing dangerous driving in urban areas. Lessons must be learned to ensure that the public understand the changes being made and involved in local decision-making.
Plaid Cymru will consider what other powers can be used to improve driver behaviour, particularly of younger drivers who are statistically shown to be involved in greater numbers of traffic collisions.
