Economy & Taxation.
 Under David Cameron, the Tory government pursued a financial programme of devastating cuts to public services in the name of austerity. The UK’s international trade was undermined by the hard Brexit pursued by both Theresa May and Boris Johnson. And then the economy was crashed completely by Liz Truss.
We are living with the legacies of all of these examples of the Conservatives’ poor economic judgement, which are being echoed by a Labour Party that has already tied itself to their spending plans.
So long as Wales remains a part of the UK, Plaid Cymru believes that the role of UK Government in Wales should be to provide enough financial support for our public services and to create the conditions for the kind of sustainable economic growth from which all people and communities can benefit, rather than just those at the top of the tree.
This is not what UK Governments have delivered. Our public services are underfunded and have been hollowed out, and our economy has stagnated. These economic conditions have led to wholly unacceptable rising levels of child deprivation, with a heartbreaking one in three children now growing up in poverty.
  A Fair Funding Formula Plaid Cymru believes that Wales should be funded according to our needs, not the out-dated Barnett Formula which instead provides funding proportionate to spending on England’s needs. We want to see a new needs-based funding formula introduced in place of the Barnett Formula.
A Fairer Tax System We believe that Wales should have full control of economic levers, in order to grow and green our economy in a way that will have the greatest positive impact upon our communities. We want the Senedd to have powers to set income tax bands and thresholds, as they already do in Scotland, so that we can create a system that fits Wales’s circumstances.
At a UK level, we want to see the balance of the tax burden fall on those individuals and corporations with the broadest shoulders bearing a fairer share of overall tax paid, rather than those with less means.
In recent years, we have seen some industries substantially increase their profits because of market conditions and not as a result of their own investment and endeavours. These sectors, which have included oil and gas producers and energy companies, should be appropriately taxed, particularly where there is an effective monopoly or cartel which controls the product. In particular, we think that energy companies should be subject to an increased windfall tax, and will close loopholes which they currently exploit to avoid this. At the same time, we will promote renewable energy investment as an alternative.
We would re-introduce the cap on bankers’ bonuses.
Plaid Cymru would equalise capital gains tax with income tax, raising between £12bn - £15bn. We would investigate increasing higher earners’ National Insurance contributions, and support introducing a wealth tax.
We would crack down on tax evasion and avoidance, and abolish loopholes for non-doms.
Ambitions for our Economy In the run up to the 2026 Senedd elections, we will set new targets for the Welsh economy so that we can better understand the impact of policy decisions and investment choices through their outcomes, rather than ticking boxes on process.
Recognising the inequality in economic performance of different nations and regions in the UK, Plaid Cymru propose an Economic Fairness Bill that will make levelling up a meaningful phrase, rather than a political slogan, ensuring that the impact of fiscal decisions are considered on a wider level than just what is best for the City of London.
Recognising the challenge of regional inequalities within Wales, we will also ensure that the same consideration is given to all parts of Wales to be sure that everybody benefits from Welsh Government investment decisions.
Plaid Cymru campaigned in 2016 for Wales to stay in the European Union, recognising both the social and economic benefits which accrued from that membership. We respected the result of the referendum, but, with the Conservatives having led us down a path of destruction, we believe that the UK should re-enter the European Single Market and Customs Union at the earliest opportunity, in order to mitigate the impact of Brexit on Welsh business and reduce overheads and administrative costs. This will help us improve trade with our European neighbours, including the Republic of Ireland, assisting our Welsh ports at Holyhead and Fishguard amongst others.
A Welsh Green New Deal.
Plaid Cymru believes that we need to retain the ability to produce primary steel in Wales. We oppose Tata’s current plans for the closure of its blast furnaces in Port Talbot and the impact that these plans will have on jobs and communities in southwest Wales and beyond. The UK Government should look to nationalise the Port Talbot steelworks.
Failing this, the Welsh Government should explore options for the compulsory purchase of the plant while future options for greening steel production – including through replacing coal with green hydrogen – are developed.
We will create a Welsh Green New Deal. This will create rewarding, meaningful and fair work in the emerging green and net-zero sector, and includes re-skilling and supporting Welsh employees and apprentices into these sectors, meeting the need associated with demographic change in the manufacturing workforce and the skills shortages already identified.
As part of the move towards net-zero, we will establish a Just Transition Commission.
A Development Agency for Wales.
We will establish a National Development Agency for Wales which is fit for purpose as we approach the quarter point of the 21st century. This means a forward-thinking approach that will meet economic challenges into the 2050s and beyond, recognising a world of innovation, understanding both Wales’ needs and strengths, and being agile enough to respond to changing business landscapes.
We recognise the importance of accessing capital, and will reform the Development Bank of Wales. Our aim will be for the bank to take and profit from greater equity shares in emerging businesses and invest in infrastructure projects, functioning more like a real national development bank. We will also ensure that Welsh Government has the power to develop a community bank to provide local banking services to customers in communities where private banking institutions, such as the Big Four of HSBC, Barclays, Lloyds and NatWest have left the market, building on the work already undertaken by Banc Cambria.
 “We believe that Wales should have full control of economic levers, in order to grow and green our economy in a way that will have the greatest positive impact upon our communities.”.
Supporting our Businesses.
The small business sector is the backbone of the Welsh economy. We want to support economic conditions in which Wales develops its own range of locally owned medium sized companies, which further develop Welsh supply chains and investment: retaining value created within the Welsh economy and leading to improved employment opportunities in high quality, high paying jobs.
We support the reform in Wales of Non-Domestic Rates, also known as Business Rates, in order to establish a system which better supports our small businesses.
We would reverse the reductions in support to small businesses as a result of Labour Welsh Government cuts this year, and amend the multiplier to better support high street business, such as retail and hospitality.
Procurement is an important part of the Welsh economy, creating additional jobs through the supply chain. We will work towards a target of 75% of Welsh public sector spend being with companies located in Wales, recognising that this promotes investment in quality goods within Wales and higher employment skills. We will consider the obstacles that exist in reaching this target, e.g. the size of contracts or opportunities for Welsh companies to bid effectively.
Recognising the success of the Basque Mondragon co-operative, Plaid Cymru will promote co-operative, employee and community ownership models. This may be particularly appropriate in communities where private capital appears unwilling to invest but where services are locally valued and important.
Equally, in sectors which are still establishing themselves, such as green industries, community ownership models may become the default investment model in Wales, rather than relying on extractive private capital from outside.
Fairness for Employees.
We support the devolution of employment law to Wales, having seen the Conservative UK Government roll back on workers’ rights from Westminster in recent years.
In a world of increasing threats to workers, employment rights desperately need strengthening. We would reverse the Tories’ regressive anti-strike legislation. We would also support legislation to tackle insecure work, provide paid bereavement and miscarriage leave as ‘day one employment rights’, outlaw fire and re-hire tactics, abolish compulsory zero-hours contracts, establish the right to ‘disconnect’ (a right not to be routinely contacted about work outside normal working hours), and reform Shared Parental Leave.
Following the introduction of the Carer’s Leave Act 2023 which provides a right to five days unpaid leave to care for a person with a long-term need, a similar provision for paid leave should be considered.
Fairness for our Planet Recognising the climate and nature emergency in which we find ourselves, we need to think beyond economic growth in terms of GDP, and will call on the next UK Government to consider adopting alternative ways of measuring the economy.
We would introduce a Business, Human Rights and Environment Bill.
This would mandate that private companies conduct due diligence in their supply chains to prevent human rights abuses and environmental harms. The mechanism for enforcement would be modelled on the ‘duty to prevent’, as seen in the Bribery Act 2010.
Fairness for our Post Offices The impact of the Post Office scandal has been felt strongly in Wales, with sub-postmasters being under suspicion and wrongly convicted because of the failures of the Horizon system and the Post Office. These wrongs should be corrected and proper compensation given to those affected by the services failures. Plaid Cymru believes that the the Post Office should be devolved to Wales and in public ownership, reflecting the crucial role that Post Offices play in life across the country.
