Criminal Justice and Policing Our Ambition for Criminal Justice Powers.
Plaid Cymru support the full transfer of justice powers to Wales, as recommended by three independent commissions, including the Thomas Commission on Justice in Wales and, most recently, the Independent Commission on the Constitutional Future for Wales.
 This will allow us to develop a Welsh way of policing and criminal justice. It makes no sense that many of the policy levers for reducing crime in Wales are held in our Senedd, while others are still held by Westminster.
Scotland and Northern Ireland have full control of justice powers, and even devolved English regions, such as Manchester, have control over their policing.
As part of this transfer of powers, we would create a Minister of Justice in the Welsh Government, who would be responsible to the people of Wales, not Westminster.
A Plaid Cymru government would review the operation of criminal justice governance in Wales, and remove the role of elected Police and Crime Commissioners, as it would be the Minister for Justice who would be held accountable.
 Fair Funding for Wales’s Police Forces.
By stealth, the Conservative UK Government has transferred the burden of paying for the Police from a central responsibility to local people. This is clearly unfair.
There has been a decade of Tory cuts in which Wales’s police forces have been increasingly under-funded by the Police Funding Formula at Westminster.
Wales gets less than its fair share of police funding, per head of population. The impact of this is that we in Wales have had to increase the policing element of council tax by greater than inflation, just to maintain the same services.
While policing remains in the control of the Westminster Government, Plaid Cymru will make the case that policing must be properly funded in order to do its job properly of preventing crime as well as catching and convicting criminals.
Given Cardiff’s status as a capital city, Plaid Cymru believes that there should be additional funding to recognise the higher profile events which take place there, and the security arrangements required to police these. This already happens in other UK capitals.
Supporting Victims of Crime Plaid Cymru believes that victims of crime and anti-social behaviour should be at the centre of justice and police services.
By listening to those with lived experience of being a victim of crime, we can provide better services that are more responsive to people’s needs, both in the immediate aftermath of crime taking place and in the longer-term.
Plaid Cymru would create a Victims Commissioner for Wales, who would be able to represent victims of crime and stand up for their rights so that they are not forgotten or ignored by decision makers.
Prevention of Violence Against Women and Girls Plaid Cymru recognises the scale and challenges of violence against women and girls and the need to prevent and reduce the harm that this causes.
There are great challenges in the criminal justice system to ensure that women and girls are believed, and that they get justice for crimes committed against them.
There is a need for specialist training and support officers around the issues of coercive control, stalking and an improved understanding of homicide risk.
We will work with Police and Crime Commissioners in Wales to further develop this support for women and girls.
The number of convictions for crimes against women and girls is very small. The Victims Commissioner could help increase the number of successful convictions of perpetrators, as part of a series of measures.
These include: —Create a Domestic Abuse Register to protect women is a means of preventing death and injury because it enables the early identification of abusive men. This would shift the responsibility away from the potential victims (as happens under Clare’s Law) and on to the authorities and the offender themselves.
—Stop abusers further harassing their victims through court proceedings and strengthen restraining orders and sanctions for breaching them.
—Following the recommendation of the Suzy Lamplugh Trust that there are specialist stalking training requirements for all professionals dealing with stalking cases, and a unified recording system to be used by the Police, the CPS, the Home Office, Ministry of Justice and National Probation Service to follow the journey of a victim of stalking through the criminal justice system.
 —Ensure that laws relating to sexual images are always based on consent rather than intent - to close loopholes that see perpetrators get away with abuse, and —Increasing sentences for domestic violence and stalking offences.
Prisons Wales has the highest imprisonment rate in Western Europe, despite having no control over criminal justice policy.
UK Government prison construction is a factor.
The construction of HMP Berwyn, near Wrexham, and a substantial increase in prison population at HMP Parc, in Bridgend, have contributed to the high in-country imprisonment rate in Wales over the past decade. Prisoner numbers continue to rise.
Plaid Cymru does not support private prison provision, which we believe is a responsibility of the state. We are alarmed by the recent number of deaths and criticisms of HMP Parc, which we feel needs full investigation and to be brought back under full public control.
At present, the prison estate is effectively full, posing a danger to prisoners, staff and victims. Sentencing policy should consider what works best to prevent criminals from re-offending and being a danger to the wider public.
This includes restorative justice, community based sentences for low-risk offenders and community- based prevention and rehabilitation.
Fairness for Women in Justice.
Plaid Cymru believes that women are not well served by our criminal justice system.
Women’s custodial sentences are served outside of Wales, with an impact upon travel time for the family, the provision of services in Welsh and a disconnect with their community.
Most women who serve custodial sentences are only in prison for a short period, which is less effective in reducing crime, but has substantial social impact.
We will focus on reducing crime through identifying the underlying reasons why women are involved in criminal behaviour and working with partners to resolve those issues, and review the effectiveness of short prison sentences for female offenders.
As part of this ongoing work to reduce crime, Plaid Cymru want to establish four community based women’s centres across Wales to support female offenders.
We will work with Police and Crime Commissioners in Wales to deliver this, with one each in the north-west, north-east, south-west and south-east of the country.
Probation.
We are concerned that the probation service remains under-resourced and over-worked.
We support NAPO’s calls for a strategic reduction programme, with safe workloads and a case allocation system.
Manageable workloads are key to ensuring the protection of staff, offenders and the public.
Devolving the criminal justice system would ensure better collaboration between prisons and services which are already devolved, reducing homelessness upon release, improve health provision and address concerns about the privately-run Parc Prison.
Ensuring Justice for All Plaid Cymru believes that everybody should have access to justice, within easy access of the community in which they live. Sadly, for too many years, this right has been reduced, either through deliberate closure of local court facilities or the reduction in funding or opportunities for legal support.
We would provide additional help to prevent these legal aid ‘deserts’ which means that individuals are prevented from accessing timely advice and support.
This involves supporting the legal workforce to move into these fields of provision and making the whole field more sustainable.
 Many parts of Wales were affected by court closures under both Labour and Conservative governments, making it difficult to access justice in the local community. Plaid Cymru would pilot a courts in the community scheme which visit areas of the country with an appropriate timetable to resolve local justice needs.
This could also help reduce the backlog of court cases, which have become endemic within the system due to the under-funding by the Conservatives.
Transparency in Policing As part of a move towards greater transparency in policing, Plaid Cymru support legislation at Westminster which will require police officers to declare memberships of clubs, societies and organisations to ensure that relationships outside of the workplace are transparent and above board.
This will provide increased transparency and confidence in policing.
Policing Drugs.
Plaid Cymru believes that drugs policing should focus on targeting supply lines and dealers in the organised trade, rather than individual users, if those people are causing no wider harm.
We recognise that some drug users are responsible for acquisitive crime in order to fund their dependency. They should be supported to stop their addiction. Many users are also dealers and are exploited as part of the crime network. This is a matter of particular safeguarding concern when it involves children.
Plaid Cymru believes that drugs policy is a matter of public health, and reducing the number of individuals with addictions has a wider benefit to society. Introducing drug consumption rooms across Wales will facilitate a more humane and sustainable approach to addiction issues.
It is clear that traditional methods of policing drugs and organised crime has not been successful and has led to a hostile and violent environment. Plaid Cymru would welcome an independent review of drug policy and how it is policed.
We believe that by introducing a policy of soft drugs decriminalisation which respects individual choices, we could better target policing resources towards organised groups who profit from misery and other people’s vulnerabilities.
Alongside this, we believe that the UK Home Office should cleanse the criminal records of those cautioned or convicted of drugs possession where there are no further aggregating factors.
Policing Protest.
Plaid Cymru believes that non-violent protest is an important mechanism in democracy to show public support of solidarity for a cause. We support the right of an individual to freedom of expression and assembly.
The rights of the individual should be respected, as should the rights of police officers not to be under threat of harm while carrying out their legitimate duties.
We do not support the legislation introduced by the Conservative UK Government which unfairly restricts opportunities for non-violent protest. Plaid Cymru would repeal these powers at Westminster, including the relevant parts of the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022 and the Public Order Act 2023.
Sadly, some groups frequently resort to violence in order to make their point, and this needs to be policed in a stronger manner than events which are non-violent in nature.
It is highly disappointing that large costs of more than £1m have been spent by Dyfed-Powys Police to police protests at Llanelli’s Stradey Park Hotel for a misguided Conservative UK Government plan, and which were later dropped.
Plaid Cymru believes that Dyfed-Powys Police should be compensated for the cost of Westminster’s mistake, rather than recoup that cost from local taxpayers in the area.
 Supporting our Justice Staff Plaid Cymru recognise that Police Officers, Prison Officers and probation staff all work hard for their communities to deliver the best possible services.
That can mean putting themselves in danger or under threat of personal harm through trying to reduce the threat of injury or harm to others.
We will continue to provide best practice support to serving police and prison officers to deal with the trauma and challenges of dealing with their everyday tasks, as well as unusual or particularly difficult circumstances which may arise in the course of their duties.
We will tackle staff retention issues in the prison and probation services by reducing the prison officer pension age down from 68.
