Migration and Asylum.
Plaid Cymru strongly oppose the Conservative UK Government’s proposals and attitudes towards asylum seekers and refugees, including deportation to Rwanda and the general hostile environment created.
We believe that the UK should uphold the commitments made when it signed up to the Refugee Treaty in 1951.
 Safe Routes.
We believe that the UK Government has undermined that commitment through their failure to provide safe routes for asylum seekers and by deliberately failing to process claims quickly, effectively and humanely, leading to deaths at sea and un-necessary misery amongst already vulnerable people seeking safety.
Effective management of the asylum process would allow processing to take place prior to reaching the UK, in a third country such as France or at British embassies or consulates abroad.
The creation of an online programme which shows an indicator of a likely outcome for an asylum application would also help to manage this process.
We recognise that there has been an increase in major conflicts during the past decade, including those in Syria, Afghanistan, Ukraine and Gaza, which have globally increased the number of displaced peoples.
We believe that those people affected by conflict, or through persecution in their home country, are deserving of our help and support.
Once here, we believe that responsibility for asylum seekers and dispersal should be proportionate across the UK.
We support a family reunification scheme for those caught up within the conflict in Gaza, with a clear right to return to their homeland when possible to do so.
 Wales: A Nation of Sanctuary.
Wales should have the powers and resources to make good on our pledge to become a Nation of Sanctuary. We were disappointed by Labour’s recent removal of the Welcome Ticket in Wales which allowed free transport for refugees on public transport.
We oppose Conservative proposals to increase the skilled worker and family visa threshold and fee increases.
We support the Migration Advisory Committees’ recommendation that the graduate route visa be retained. We are concerned that current proposals will detrimentally affect universities, including those in Bangor and Aberystwyth, with a knock-on effect upon local communities where universities are major employers.
We would support the repeal of previous punitive legislation which is part of the hostile environment, including the Nationality and Borders Act 2022 and the Illegal Migration Act 2023.
We believe that there should be changes within the system, including the ending of the ‘No Recourse to Public Funds’ clause and restrictions on employment while awaiting decisions, both of which un-necessarily force people into poverty rather than providing support.
Plaid Cymru supports the UK remaining a member of the European Court of Human Rights and we support maintaining the human rights which we, collectively, hold.
We believe that, similar to Quebec in Canada, Wales should have greater powers over migration – including the ability to determine our own Shortage Occupation List and granting the Welsh Government the ability to manage its own visa schemes.
Migrants play an important role within our society, contributing to many occupations including social care and healthcare in particular. Their contribution should be welcomed, rather than criticised.
