FOR FAIRNESS, FOR AMBITION, FOR WALES.
Plaid Cymru Manifesto for the Westminster General Election 2024.
 Introduction.
By Rhun ap Iorwerth MS Plaid Cymru MPs have always been Wales’s voice in Westminster, not Westminster’s voice in Wales.
This is not as good as it gets for our nation. The following pages set out our party’s vision of a fairer, more ambitious future where everyone can achieve their potential, regardless of circumstance or background.
Being tied to Westminster means all risk and no reward for our nation. Wales is languishing at the bottom of too many league tables, our economy is stagnating, our transport network is creaking, and the lack of control over our natural resources means that we are energy-rich but fuel-poor.
What sets Plaid Cymru apart is a record of not taking Wales for granted and always putting the interests of our communities and nation first.
After 14 years of Tory cuts and weak opposition from Labour, Plaid Cymru offers a real alternative for Wales.
We will fight every day for the billions owed to Wales from the HS2 high-speed rail project, and for a fair funding model which funds our country according to need, not population.
This will enable us to invest in our public services and better reward our workforce.
By supporting families and by devolving powers to ensure that more of the decisions that affect Wales are made in Wales, we will address the cost of living crisis and provide Welsh solutions to Welsh problems.
Our ambition can be seen in our confidence that Wales can and should run its own affairs as an outward looking independent nation.
Plaid Cymru is a party for the whole of Wales. Our candidates are rooted in their communities and passionate about overcoming the challenges facing our economy and public services.
Wherever you live, you can be sure that a vote for Plaid Cymru on 4th July is a vote for a Member of Parliament who will always stand up for Wales’s best interests every day.
 Secure the £4bn owed to Wales from HS2 to invest in improving our own public transport in all parts of the country and reversing cuts to local bus services.
Demand a fair funding system for Wales, based around our needs, giving us the public services we deserve.
Fair funding from Westminster, enabling us to invest in our NHS workforce and recruit 500 GPs into Wales after years of Tory cuts and Labour mismanagement in Cardiff.
A new Cancer Strategy to ensure cancers are caught and treated earlier, and ending Wales’s postcode lottery for treatment.
Help 330,000 Welsh families to deal with the cost of living crisis by increasing Child Benefit by £20 per week. This will take 60,000 children out of poverty in Wales.
Redressing economic unfairness; increasing windfall taxes and devolving the Crown Estate in order to create green jobs and build prosperity.
FAIR FUNDING FOR WALES.
FAIR PLAY FOR PATIENTS.
FAIRNESS FOR FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES.
“Plaid Cymru is a party for the whole of Wales. Our candidates are rooted in their communities and passionate about overcoming the challenges facing our economy and public services.”  “ Wherever you live, you can be sure that a vote for Plaid Cymru on 4th July is a vote for a Member of Parliament who will always stand up for Wales’s best interests every day.”  The past fourteen years of Conservative UK Government have been economically very damaging for people, families and business in Wales.
