Housing and Planning.
Plaid Cymru believes that everybody has the right to a safe and affordable home in their community, and this should be the purpose of the housing system. We will introduce a Right to Adequate Housing which will underpin this.
 An Ambition to Build Social Housing.
Wales needs to ensure that the supply of housing meets community needs.
This requires a significant expansion in the amount of social and municipal housing stock, a policy that would help to tackle private rental sector rent rises.
Plaid Cymru campaigned to end the scandal of the Housing Revenue Account Subsidy Scheme which saw local authorities send council house tenant rental income to Westminster rather than re-invested within local housing. As a result, eleven local authorities now have the opportunity to build their own council housing once again, and they and housing associations should be supported to develop further housing as quickly as possible.
In government in Wales, Plaid Cymru will develop a plan to deliver this significant expansion to meet local housing need in all parts of the country, accessing a mixture of public and private funding streams and working with communities to provide the correct mix of housing across Wales.
While planning these developments, we will factor in the needs of the local community for healthcare, education and transport, as well as sufficient green space and local play facilities.
 Supporting Welsh Construction.
Our ‘Unnos’ policy aims to support the Welsh construction industry as part of our proposals, creating centres of excellence in both new construction and retrofitting existing housing stock.
We will work with local authorities and housing associations to further develop Welsh local supply chains and skilled labour, so that the profits from the Welsh house-building industry can be kept within Wales, rather than exported by the large ‘volume’ housebuilders.
In further developing plans for house-building across Wales, we need to identify appropriate land, and properly align this with other community needs, including provision of healthcare, education and transport, amongst others. This involves strategic planning at national, regional and local levels to ensure delivery.
Tackling Homelessness Meeting communities’ housing needs and increasing the housing stock will also reduce the numbers of individuals and families facing homelessness in Wales. In the Senedd, we have prioritised tackling homelessness, and are awaiting new legislation to be developed following the White Paper on Housing published last Autumn.
Using the Housing First model and rapid rehousing, we will look to end homelessness, recognising that much of the challenge is not just those sleeping on the streets or in allocated temporary accommodation, but those people who are staying with friends and family.
One of the challenges is tackling long-term empty or unused property that could be someone’s home.
Plaid Cymru’s campaigning has helped increase council tax premiums on empty properties, which have funded grants to increase the supply of affordable homes. There is no good reason why so many properties are left empty when they could be housing individuals and families.
We believe that everybody has the right to live within the community in which they were raised. Plaid Cymru has also supported a package of actions to tackle the challenge of second homes and holiday homes within our communities, with a substantial impact felt in Ynys Mon, Gwynedd and Pembrokeshire in particular where they make up a large amount of the available housing stock.
We have introduced powers for local authorities to require registration of a change of use for a property into a holiday home and to introduce a cap on the number of second and holiday homes within a community.
Many local authorities in Wales have now introduced a council tax premium on second homes, where the additional funds raised are put towards development of social housing for local residents. We are also looking to close loopholes which allow holiday homes to pretend to be legitimate lettings businesses, so that we can ensure that genuine self-catered accommodation businesses can be protected.
Fairness in the Private Rental Sector.
Within the private rental sector, we believe in a system of fair rents and rent control so that they are affordable to local people on local incomes, and that individuals and families are not priced out of the area where they currently live.
Our proposed Right to Adequate Housing Bill in Wales would include powers to introduce rent controls and other market interventions to make housing more affordable.
 Fairness in Planning.
The planning system is out-dated and needs an overhaul. Far too often communities are at the mercy of large developers who build executive homes for profit rather than build the required homes to answer the need. We know that there is huge demand for one and two bed properties in Wales, as well as bungalows for an ageing population, yet developers fail to build houses that answer community needs.
We will reform the planning system so that it is consistent with local needs and aspirations, rather than reflecting the interests of developers.
This means maintaining up-to-date information on housing need and ensuring that developments reflect this need. This would be supported by funding packages to assist local government to robustly enforce planning decisions ensuring that developers stick to agreements.
We will ensure that Local Development Plans are not imposed upon local planning authorities without their support.
Plaid Cymru would amend how Cold Weather Payments assessments are made.
Cold Weather Payments are made when the temperature dips below freezing for seven days. However, the measuring stations in Wales are often near coastal areas which may be warmer than surrounding mountainous areas, thereby reducing those populations payment eligibility.
We are concerned that many vulnerable people are missing out on these payments because the weather in their location is substantially different to the area being measured by the Met Office.
Universal Basic Income Pilots Plaid Cymru support the principle of a universal basic income and will support pilots.
In Wales, there has been a universal basic income pilot with care leavers, and we await the findings of that project.
