Health & Social Care.
Plaid Cymru strongly believes in the principle of healthcare free at the point of delivery, funded through general taxation. We oppose the privatisation of services by stealth through out-sourcing, and will work to ensure that our NHS is properly funded through a new fairer and needs-based funding model for Wales.
 Fairness for our NHS Workforce.
Plaid Cymru believes that the NHS is nothing without its staff. We stand in solidarity with doctors, nurses and other healthcare professionals who are undertaking industrial action on pay and wage restoration.
We believe that wage restoration pledges for NHS staff must be implemented as soon as possible, to show that that we value and support our staff and to boost recruitment and retention in key areas.
In Wales we have seen a significant reduction in the numbers of GPs over the past decade. Plaid Cymru will reverse this trend by restoring funding for GPs to 8.7% of the Welsh health budget, and by recruiting an additional 500 GPs across the country. Given the time needed to recruit and train GPs, this will be a two-term pledge.
Plaid Cymru would increase the availability of degree apprenticeships in the healthcare sector to provide greater opportunities for young people to enter the profession and remain in Wales to work.
 Unfilled vacancies within the NHS mean that agency spending continues to be at a high level. Better workforce planning and recruitment to posts will save money.
Plaid Cymru believes that shareholders should not be profiting from people’s ill health, and that profits from private agencies would lead to a better service if it was instead re-invested into healthcare.
Nurses’ contracts need to be made more flexible to reflect the age in which we live. Many nurses are part-time because they juggle other responsibilities, such as caring and learning, and need greater flexibility to achieve a work-life balance. Plaid Cymru would move towards an improved working contract for nurses, and recruit more nurses.
Plaid Cymru recognises the value of nursing and physician associates, but their introduction must not come at the expense of the overall expertise of the workforce. Any new roles should be developed with full consultation with the relevant trade unions.
Governance Plaid Cymru will review governance of the NHS in Wales, looking to strengthen oversight and accountability so that patients receive a better outcome.
Crucially, this doesn’t have to mean expensive or disruptive root-and- branch restructuring of our health service. Rather, we will focus on small but significant cultural changes – streamlining and standardising targets, making lines of accountability clearer and recruiting managers with more specialist and relevant knowledge.
Our reforms would mean that the special measures status of health boards in Wales would more accurately reflect health outcomes rather than being open to political influence from the Labour Welsh Government.
Equally, we support greater independent oversight of health board managers.
We would also introduce a regulatory body for Senior Health Managers. Medical staff are accountable to their regulatory bodies, such as the GMC, but the same is not true of senior health managers.
Establishing a regulatory body for managers would help improve patient safety and empower staff by ensuring that every decision reflects the values of candour, honesty and integrity.
Public Health.
Plaid Cymru believes that we should move public health towards becoming a wellness service that is geared towards keeping people healthy. A preventative public health strategy which rebalances resources to prevent people becoming ill would help the NHS overall by stopping patients entering the system earlier than necessary.
Health inequalities are an important part of this agenda, including those determined by class, race and gender. A review of the financing model for Wales should better consider the determinants of healthcare to meet our needs.
 Infected Blood Scandal.
Plaid Cymru welcomes the report of the long-awaited Inquiry into the infected blood scandal. This was an appalling miscarriage of justice which has taken decades to fully come to light because of a defensive culture of secrecy. We support the report’s recommendation of a duty of candour for all public servants as well as full and immediate compensation for those affected.
Similarly, we support the proposals set out by the Patient Safety Commissioner in the Hughes Report to provide compensation and a duty of candour to mesh patients and those harmed by valproate.
Fairness: A Covid Inquiry for Wales.
It is crucial that Wales understands the decisions made during the Covid Pandemic in order that we can better prepare for any future situations. We believe that Wales should have the powers to make its own decisions, and that our government should be held accountable for the use of those powers. There should therefore be a Wales- specific Inquiry into Covid, as the decisions of the Labour Welsh Government and impacts upon Welsh civic society cannot be considered in the necessary detail by a UK-level Inquiry. The Welsh Government should work together with UK Government to ensure better preparedness in future.
Similarly, we recognise that many people are affected by Long Covid, as a result of the illness, and appropriate support must be provided.
A National Care Service for Wales.
Plaid Cymru has been working to deliver a National Care Service for Wales. We believe that social care, like health care, should be free at the point of use, and that the distinction between the two is artificial. Ending this distinction will also help with reducing Delayed Transfers of Care, the time that people remain in hospital rather than care settings. We will continue to work towards this goal, particularly to support those with dementia.
 “Plaid Cymru believes that we should move public health towards becoming a wellness service that is geared towards keeping people healthy”.
 We support John’s Campaign for the right of people to be supported by their family carers and will provide clarity that it is a human right for family visits to care homes to support patients with dementia.
Also, in line with the National Care Service, Plaid Cymru is committed to the consultation on the elimination of profit in children’s services provision.
Our aim is to work towards the gradual expansion in capacity of direct provision, in both children’s services and adult services to achieve this.
We support the health and social care workforce in Wales, whatever their country of origin.
Restrictions on visas for care workers and dependents is counter-productive when we are looking to recruit additional staff to underpin our institutions. Instead, staff should be provided with the most appropriate support to allow them to integrate into Welsh society.
We will pay social care workers at least £1 above the Real Living Wage in order to make the job more attractive and improve recruitment, and make this index linked. This would ensure that a full-time worker was paid greater than £1,800 more than the Real Living Wage.
Dentistry.
Plaid Cymru would open a new dental school in Bangor, as part of the new medical school to train more dentists to answer Wales’s needs.
Plaid Cymru would scrap the dental charge increases.
Air Ambulance Provision Plaid Cymru want to see a continuation of the current Air Ambulance provision at Welshpool and Caernarfon, alongside a rapid response vehicle on the A55.
Supporting Third Sector Organisations.
In both health and social care, third sector organisations are an important part of the patient journey and support. These organisations are under- valued, but play a key role.
In order to plan ahead for their activities, they need to have secure funding.
We will support for multi- annual funding settlements where this is possible and appropriate, to allow these organisations to better plan their activities.
Cancer Contract / A Stop Cancer Strategy Plaid Cymru’s cancer contract, a Stop Cancer Strategy, would ensure no downgrading of urgent suspected cancer referrals, lower the sensitivity threshold for bowel cancer screening – as has already been done in Scotland and England – and increase rates of lung cancer screening, to ensure that more cancers are caught and treated earlier. A greater focus on prehabilitation would ensure that people are better prepared for cancer treatment to help with their recovery. We would invest in the workforce to recruit, train and retain more oncology staff.
We will support the creation of a national register of Barrett’s oesophagus in Wales.
Neurodiversity.
Waiting lists for neurodiversity diagnoses are far too long, meaning that children and young people fail to get the proper support they need. Plaid Cymru would ensure that support was made available as soon as an individual presents themselves as neurodiverse, whether this be through referral or self-referral. This support will be monitored and tailored to respond to the individual’s need as the diagnosis process progresses.
 Mental Health.
We support reform of the Mental Health Act. Reform is well overdue, following an independent review of the Act in 2018 and a 2021 White Paper. We will press Welsh Government to make necessary amendments to the Code of Practice in Wales.
Alongside the transfer of full powers over policing to Wales, we would also transfer powers over the Mental Health Act.
Tackling Specific Conditions Building on the Community Cardiology Diagnostic Vehicle in Betsi Cadwaladr which performs diagnostic tests within the community, we will consider which other services could benefit from this, e.g. audiology, diabetes etc. By developing pilots and best practice, we can reduce the number of people travelling to hospitals, while also increasing uptake by placing it in the local community.
We will reduce delays to diagnosis to Crohn’s and Colitis, coeliac disease, and IBS by implementing the national primary diagnostic pathway for lower gastrointestinal symptoms.
As a result of our industrial heritage, Wales has the highest level of respiratory deaths in Western Europe, and nearly 1 in 5 people live with a lung condition in Wales. We will deliver an improvement plan to improve the lives of people living with lung conditions.
End of Life Support.
Plaid Cymru supports a review of the impact of recent changes to the Special Rules for Terminal Illness. We would extend statutory bereavement leave and pay entitlement of two weeks to all people with a close relationship to a person who has died.
Community Pharmacies.
Plaid Cymru supports our small community pharmacies. Sadly, the price of medication and the supply chain are endangering their ability to provide vital local services. We would support a change in the legislation on drug tariffs which has pushed up prices and a review into the supply chain to ensure that patients get the medication that they need, when they need it.
